﻿
The Project Gutenberg EBook of Les Misérables, by Victor Hugo

This eBook is for the use of anyone anywhere at no cost and with
almost no restrictions whatsoever.  You may copy it, give it away or
re-use it under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included
with this eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org


Title: Les Misérables
       Complete in Five Volumes

Author: Victor Hugo

Translator: Isabel F. Hapgood

Release Date: June 22, 2008 [EBook #135]
Last Updated: May 19, 2019


Language: English
﻿Contents



 LES MISÉRABLES

 VOLUME I—FANTINE

 PREFACE

 BOOK FIRST—A JUST MAN

 CHAPTER I—M. MYRIEL

 CHAPTER II—M. MYRIEL BECOMES M. WELCOME

 CHAPTER III—A HARD BISHOPRIC FOR A GOOD BISHOP

 CHAPTER IV—WORKS CORRESPONDING TO WORDS

 CHAPTER V—MONSEIGNEUR BIENVENU MADE HIS CASSOCKS LAST TOO LONG

 CHAPTER VI—WHO GUARDED HIS HOUSE FOR HIM

 CHAPTER VII—CRAVATTE

 CHAPTER VIII—PHILOSOPHY AFTER DRINKING

 CHAPTER IX—THE BROTHER AS DEPICTED BY THE SISTER

 CHAPTER X—THE BISHOP IN THE PRESENCE OF AN UNKNOWN﻿UBLES

 CHAPTER X—THE MAN AROUSED

 CHAPTER XI—WHAT HE DOES

 CHAPTER XII—THE BISHOP WORKS

 CHAPTER XIII—LITTLE GERVAIS


 BOOK THIRD—IN THE YEAR 1817

 CHAPTER I—THE YEAR 1817

 CHAPTER II—A DOUBLE QUARTETTE

 CHAPTER III—FOUR AND FOUR

 CHAPTER IV—THOLOMYÈS IS SO MERRY THAT HE SINGS A SPANISH DITTY

 CHAPTER V—AT BOMBARDA’S

 CHAPTER VI—A CHAPTER IN WHICH THEY ADORE EACH OTHER

 CHAPTER VII—THE WISDOM OF THOLOMYÈS

 CHAPTER VIII—THE DEATH OF A HORSE

 CHAPTER IX—A MERRY END TO MIRTH


 BOOK FOURTH—TO CO﻿ADAME VICTURNIEN EXPENDS THIRTY FRANCS ON MORALITY

 CHAPTER IX—MADAME VICTURNIEN’S SUCCESS

 CHAPTER X—RESULT OF THE SUCCESS

 CHAPTER XI—CHRISTUS NOS LIBERAVIT

 CHAPTER XII—M. BAMATABOIS’S INACTIVITY

 CHAPTER XIII—THE SOLUTION OF SOME QUESTIONS CONNECTED WITH THE
 MUNICIPAL POLICE


 BOOK SIXTH—JAVERT

 CHAPTER I—THE BEGINNING OF REPOSE

 CHAPTER II—HOW JEAN MAY BECOME CHAMP


 BOOK SEVENTH—THE CHAMPMATHIEU AFFAIR

 CHAPTER I—SISTER SIMPLICE

 CHAPTER II—THE PERSPICACITY OF MASTER SCAUFFLAIRE

 CHAPTER﻿ II—FANTINE HAPPY

 CHAPTER III—JAVERT SATISFIED

 CHAPTER IV—AUTHORITY REASSERTS ITS RIGHTS

 CHAPTER V—A SUITABLE TOMB



 VOLUME II—COSETTE

 BOOK FIRST—WATERLOO

 CHAPTER I—WHAT IS MET WITH ON THE WAY FROM NIVELLES

 CHAPTER II—HOUGOMONT

 CHAPTER III—THE EIGHTEENTH OF JUNE, 1815

 CHAPTER IV—A

 CHAPTER V—THE QUID OBSCURUM OF BATTLES

 CHAPTER VI—FOUR O’CLOCK IN THE AFTERNOON

 CHAPTER VII—NAPOLEON IN A GOOD HUMOR

 CHAPTER VIII—THE EMPEROR PUTS A QUESTION TO THE GUIDE LACOSTE

 CHAPTER IX—THE UNEXPEC﻿ VERSES, WHICH ARE OF
 THE DEVIL’S COMPOSITION, POSSIBLY

 CHAPTER III—THE ANKLE-CHAIN MUST HAVE UNDERGONE A CERTAIN PREPARATORY
 MANIPULATION TO BE THUS BROKEN WITH A BLOW FROM A HAMMER


 BOOK THIRD—ACCOMPLISHMENT OF THE PROMISE MADE TO THE DEAD WOMAN

 CHAPTER I—THE WATER QUESTION AT MONTFERMEIL

 CHAPTER II—TWO COMPLETE PORTRAITS

 CHAPTER III—MEN MUST HAVE WINE, AND HORSES MUST HAVE WATER

 CHAPTER IV—ENTRANCE ON THE SCENE OF A DOLL

 CHAPTER V—THE LITTLE ONE ALL ALONE

 CHAPTER VI—WHICH POSSIBLY PROV﻿S MAKE ONE PIECE OF GOOD FORTUNE

 CHAPTER IV—THE REMARKS OF THE PRINCIPAL TENANT

 CHAPTER V—A FIVE-FRANC PIECE FALLS ON THE GROUND AND PRODUCES A TUMULT


 BOOK FIFTH—FOR A BLACK HUNT, A MUTE PACK

 CHAPTER I—THE ZIGZAGS OF STRATEGY

 CHAPTER II—IT IS LUCKY THAT THE PONT D’AUSTERLITZ BEARS CARRIAGES

 CHAPTER III—TO WIT, THE PLAN OF PARIS IN 1727

 CHAPTER IV—THE GROPINGS OF FLIGHT

 CHAPTER V—WHICH WOULD BE IMPOSSIBLE WITH GAS LANTERNS

 CHAPTER VI—THE BEGINNING OF AN ENIGMA

 CHAPTER VII—CONTINUATION O﻿ THE PERPETUAL ADORATION

 CHAPTER XI—END OF THE PETIT-PICPUS


 BOOK SEVENTH—PARENTHESIS

 CHAPTER I—THE CONVENT AS AN ABSTRACT IDEA

 CHAPTER II—THE CONVENT AS AN HISTORICAL FACT

 CHAPTER III—ON WHAT CONDITIONS ONE CAN RESPECT THE PAST

 CHAPTER IV—THE CONVENT FROM THE POINT OF VIEW OF PRINCIPLES

 CHAPTER V—PRAYER

 CHAPTER VI—THE ABSOLUTE GOODNESS OF PRAYER

 CHAPTER VII—PRECAUTIONS TO BE OBSERVED IN BLAME

 CHAPTER VIII—FAITH, LAW


 BOOK EIGHTH—CEMETERIES TAKE THAT WHICH IS COMMITTED THEM

 CHAPTER ﻿PARIS STUDIED IN ITS ATOM

 CHAPTER I—PARVULUS

 CHAPTER II—SOME OF HIS PARTICULAR CHARACTERISTICS

 CHAPTER III—HE IS AGREEABLE

 CHAPTER IV—HE MAY BE OF USE

 CHAPTER V—HIS FRONTIERS

 CHAPTER VI—A BIT OF HISTORY

 CHAPTER VII—THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OF
 INDIA

 CHAPTER VIII—IN WHICH THE READER WILL FIND A CHARMING SAYING OF THE
 LAST KING

 CHAPTER IX—THE OLD SOUL OF GAUL

 CHAPTER X—ECCE PARIS, ECCE HOMO

 CHAPTER XI—TO SCOFF, TO REIGN

 CHAPTER XII—THE FUTURE LATENT IN T﻿ECTRES OF THAT EPOCH

 CHAPTER III—REQUIESCANT

 CHAPTER IV—END OF THE BRIGAND

 CHAPTER V—THE UTILITY OF GOING TO MASS, IN ORDER TO BECOME A
 REVOLUTIONIST

 CHAPTER VI—THE CONSEQUENCES OF HAVING MET A WARDEN

 CHAPTER VII—SOME PETTICOAT

 CHAPTER VIII—MARBLE AGAINST GRANITE


 BOOK FOURTH—THE FRIENDS OF THE A B C

 CHAPTER I—A GROUP WHICH BARELY MISSED BECOMING HISTORIC

 CHAPTER II—BLONDEAU’S FUNERAL ORATION BY BOSSUET

 CHAPTER III—MARIUS’ ASTONISHMENTS

 CHAPTER IV—THE BACK ROOM OF THE CAFÉ MUSAIN

 C﻿OF THUNDER FALL ON MA’AM BOUGON

 CHAPTER VI—TAKEN PRISONER

 CHAPTER VII—ADVENTURES OF THE LETTER U DELIVERED OVER TO CONJECTURES

 CHAPTER VIII—THE VETERANS THEMSELVES CAN BE HAPPY

 CHAPTER IX—ECLIPSE


 BOOK SEVENTH—PATRON MINETTE

 CHAPTER I—MINES AND MINERS

 CHAPTER II—THE LOWEST DEPTHS

 CHAPTER III—BABET, GUEULEMER, CLAQUESOUS, AND MONTPARNASSE

 CHAPTER IV—COMPOSITION OF THE TROUPE


 BOOK EIGHTH—THE WICKED POOR MAN

 CHAPTER I—MARIUS, WHILE SEEKING A GIRL IN A BONNET, ENCOUNTERS A MAN
 IN A CAP
﻿BUNTUR ORARE
 PATER NOSTER

 CHAPTER XIV—IN WHICH A POLICE AGENT BESTOWS TWO FISTFULS ON A LAWYER

 CHAPTER XV—JONDRETTE MAKES HIS PURCHASES

 CHAPTER XVI—IN WHICH WILL BE FOUND THE WORDS TO AN ENGLISH AIR WHICH
 WAS IN FASHION IN 1832

 CHAPTER XVII—THE USE MADE OF MARIUS’ FIVE-FRANC PIECE

 CHAPTER XVIII—MARIUS’ TWO CHAIRS FORM A VIS-A-VIS

 CHAPTER XIX—OCCUPYING ONE’S SELF WITH OBSCURE DEPTHS

 CHAPTER XX—THE TRAP

 CHAPTER XXI—ONE SHOULD ALWAYS BEGIN BY ARRESTING THE VICTIMS

 CHAPTER XXII—THE LITTLE O﻿N TO MARIUS


 BOOK THIRD—THE HOUSE IN THE RUE PLUMET

 CHAPTER I—THE HOUSE WITH A SECRET

 CHAPTER II—JEAN VALJEAN AS A NATIONAL GUARD

 CHAPTER III—FOLIIS AC FRONDIBUS

 CHAPTER IV—CHANGE OF GATE

 CHAPTER V—THE ROSE PERCEIVES THAT IT IS AN ENGINE OF WAR

 CHAPTER VI—THE BATTLE BEGUN

 CHAPTER VII—TO ONE SADNESS OPPOSE A SADNESS AND A HALF

 CHAPTER VIII—THE CHAIN-GANG


 BOOK FOURTH—SUCCOR FROM BELOW MAY TURN OUT TO BE SUCCOR FROM ON HIGH

 CHAPTER I—A WOUND WITHOUT, HEALING WITHIN

 CHAPTER II—MOTHER P﻿ PROFIT FROM NAPOLEON THE
 GREAT

 CHAPTER III—THE VICISSITUDES OF FLIGHT


 BOOK SEVENTH—SLANG

 CHAPTER I—ORIGIN

 CHAPTER II—ROOTS

 CHAPTER III—SLANG WHICH WEEPS AND SLANG WHICH LAUGHS

 CHAPTER IV—THE TWO DUTIES: TO WATCH AND TO HOPE


 BOOK EIGHTH—ENCHANTMENTS AND DESOLATIONS

 CHAPTER I—FULL LIGHT

 CHAPTER II—THE BEWILDERMENT OF PERFECT HAPPINESS

 CHAPTER III—THE BEGINNING OF SHADOW

 CHAPTER IV—A CAB RUNS IN ENGLISH AND BARKS IN SLANG

 CHAPTER V—THINGS OF THE NIGHT

 CHAPTER VI—MARIUS BECOMES PR﻿TOM FRATERNIZES WITH THE HURRICANE

 CHAPTER I—SOME EXPLANATIONS WITH REGARD TO THE ORIGIN OF GAVROCHE’S
 POETRY.

 CHAPTER II—GAVROCHE ON THE MARCH

 CHAPTER III—JUST INDIGNATION OF A HAIR-DRESSER

 CHAPTER IV—THE CHILD IS AMAZED AT THE OLD MAN

 CHAPTER V—THE OLD MAN

 CHAPTER VI—RECRUITS


 BOOK TWELFTH—CORINTHE

 CHAPTER I—HISTORY OF CORINTHE FROM ITS FOUNDATION

 CHAPTER II—PRELIMINARY GAYETIES

 CHAPTER III—NIGHT BEGINS TO DESCEND UPON GRANTAIRE

 CHAPTER IV—AN ATTEMPT TO CONSOLE THE WIDOW HUCHELOUP
﻿PT ENJOLRAS’
 CARBINE

 CHAPTER IV—THE BARREL OF POWDER

 CHAPTER V—END OF THE VERSES OF JEAN PROUVAIRE

 CHAPTER VI—THE AGONY OF DEATH AFTER THE AGONY OF LIFE

 CHAPTER VII—GAVROCHE AS A PROFOUND CALCULATOR OF DISTANCES


 BOOK FIFTEENTH—THE RUE DE L’HOMME ARMÉ

 CHAPTER I—A DRINKER IS A BABBLER

 CHAPTER II—THE STREET URCHIN AN ENEMY OF LIGHT

 CHAPTER III—WHILE COSETTE AND TOUSSAINT ARE ASLEEP

 CHAPTER IV—GAVROCHE’S EXCESS OF ZEAL



 VOLUME V—JEAN VALJEAN

 BOOK FIRST—THE WAR BETWEEN FOUR WALLS

 CHAP﻿RKSMANSHIP WHICH INFLUENCED THE CONDEMNATION OF 1796

 CHAPTER X—DAWN

 CHAPTER XI—THE SHOT WHICH MISSES NOTHING AND KILLS NO ONE

 CHAPTER XII—DISORDER A PARTISAN OF ORDER

 CHAPTER XIII—PASSING GLEAMS

 CHAPTER XIV—WHEREIN WILL APPEAR THE NAME OF ENJOLRAS’ MISTRESS

 CHAPTER XV—GAVROCHE OUTSIDE

 CHAPTER XVI—HOW FROM A BROTHER ONE BECOMES A FATHER

 CHAPTER XVII—MORTUUS PATER FILIUM MORITURUM EXPECTAT

 CHAPTER XVIII—THE VULTURE BECOME PREY

 CHAPTER XIX—JEAN VALJEAN TAKES HIS REVENGE

 CHAPTER XX—THE DE﻿PTER III—THE “SPUN” MAN

 CHAPTER IV—HE ALSO BEARS HIS CROSS

 CHAPTER V—IN THE CASE OF SAND AS IN THAT OF WOMAN, THERE IS A FINENESS
 WHICH IS TREACHEROUS

 CHAPTER VI—THE FONTIS

 CHAPTER VII—ONE SOMETIMES RUNS AGROUND WHEN ONE FANCIES THAT ONE IS
 DISEMBARKING

 CHAPTER VIII—THE TORN COAT-TAIL

 CHAPTER IX—MARIUS PRODUCES ON SOME ONE WHO IS A JUDGE OF THE MATTER,
 THE EFFECT OF BEING DEAD

 CHAPTER X—RETURN OF THE SON WHO WAS PRODIGAL OF HIS LIFE

 CHAPTER XI—CONCUSSION IN THE ABSOLUTE

 CHAPTER XII—THE﻿ MEN DO EVERYTHING, EACH ONE AFTER HIS OWN
 FASHION, TO RENDER COSETTE HAPPY

 CHAPTER VII—THE EFFECTS OF DREAMS MINGLED WITH HAPPINESS

 CHAPTER VIII—TWO MEN IMPOSSIBLE TO FIND


 BOOK SIXTH—THE SLEEPLESS NIGHT

 CHAPTER I—THE 16TH OF FEBRUARY, 1833

 CHAPTER II—JEAN VALJEAN STILL WEARS HIS ARM IN A SLING

 CHAPTER III—THE INSEPARABLE

 CHAPTER IV—THE IMMORTAL LIVER


 BOOK SEVENTH—THE LAST DRAUGHT FROM THE CUP

 CHAPTER I—THE SEVENTH CIRCLE AND THE EIGHTH HEAVEN

 CHAPTER II—THE OBSCURITIES WHICH A REVEL﻿NING

 CHAPTER V—A NIGHT BEHIND WHICH THERE IS DAY

 CHAPTER VI—THE GRASS COVERS AND THE RAIN EFFACES


 LETTER TO M. DAELLI

 FOOTNOTES:




List of Illustrations


 Bookshelf

 Bookcover

 Frontpapers

 Frontispiece Volume One

 Titlepage Volume One

 Titlepage Verso

 The Comfortor

 The Fall

 Awakened

 Cossette Sweeping

 Candlesticks Into the Fire

 Father Champmathieu on Trial

 Frontispiece Volume Two

 Titlepage Volume Two

 The Ship Orion, an Accident

 The Gorbeau Hovel

 The Black Hunt

 Javer﻿ MISÉRABLES



VOLUME I—FANTINE



PREFACE


So long as there shall exist, by virtue of law and custom, decrees of
damnation pronounced by society, artificially creating hells amid the
civilization of earth, and adding the element of human fate to divine
destiny; so long as the three great problems of the century—the
degradation of man through pauperism, the corruption of woman through
hunger, the crippling of children through lack of light—are unsolved;
so long as social asphyxia is possible in any part o﻿about to relate, it will not be superfluous, if merely
for the sake of exactness in all points, to mention here the various
rumors and remarks which had been in circulation about him from the
very moment when he arrived in the diocese. True or false, that which
is said of men often occupies as important a place in their lives, and
above all in their destinies, as that which they do. M. Myriel was the
son of a councillor of the Parliament of Aix; hence he belonged to the
nobility of the bar. It was said tha﻿ded each other with precipitation;
the parliamentary families, decimated, pursued, hunted down, were
dispersed. M. Charles Myriel emigrated to Italy at the very beginning
of the Revolution. There his wife died of a malady of the chest, from
which she had long suffered. He had no children. What took place next
in the fate of M. Myriel? The ruin of the French society of the olden
days, the fall of his own family, the tragic spectacles of ’93, which
were, perhaps, even more alarming to the emigrants who viewe﻿aly he was a priest.

In 1804, M. Myriel was the Curé of B—— [Brignolles]. He was already
advanced in years, and lived in a very retired manner.

About the epoch of the coronation, some petty affair connected with his
curacy—just what, is not precisely known—took him to Paris. Among other
powerful persons to whom he went to solicit aid for his parishioners
was M. le Cardinal Fesch. One day, when the Emperor had come to visit
his uncle, the worthy Curé, who was waiting in the anteroom, found
himself present﻿ the stories which were invented as
to the early portion of M. Myriel’s life? No one knew. Very few
families had been acquainted with the Myriel family before the
Revolution.

M. Myriel had to undergo the fate of every newcomer in a little town,
where there are many mouths which talk, and very few heads which think.
He was obliged to undergo it although he was a bishop, and because he
was a bishop. But after all, the rumors with which his name was
connected were rumors only,—noise, sayings, words; less tha﻿heir only domestic was a female servant of the same age as
Mademoiselle Baptistine, and named Madame Magloire, who, after having
been _the servant of M. le Curé_, now assumed the double title of maid
to Mademoiselle and housekeeper to Monseigneur.

Mademoiselle Baptistine was a long, pale, thin, gentle creature; she
realized the ideal expressed by the word “respectable”; for it seems
that a woman must needs be a mother in order to be venerable. She had
never been pretty; her whole life, which had been noth﻿re pretext for a soul’s remaining on the earth.

Madame Magloire was a little, fat, white old woman, corpulent and
bustling; always out of breath,—in the first place, because of her
activity, and in the next, because of her asthma.

On his arrival, M. Myriel was installed in the episcopal palace with
the honors required by the Imperial decrees, which class a bishop
immediately after a major-general. The mayor and the president paid the
first call on him, and he, in turn, paid the first call on the general
﻿, the drawing-rooms,
the chambers, the principal courtyard, which was very large, with walks
encircling it under arcades in the old Florentine fashion, and gardens
planted with magnificent trees. In the dining-room, a long and superb
gallery which was situated on the ground floor and opened on the
gardens, M. Henri Puget had entertained in state, on July 29, 1714, My
Lords Charles Brûlart de Genlis, archbishop; Prince d’Embrun; Antoine
de Mesgrigny, the capuchin, Bishop of Grasse; Philippe de Vendôme,
Gran﻿story, with a
small garden.

Three days after his arrival, the Bishop visited the hospital. The
visit ended, he had the director requested to be so good as to come to
his house.

“Monsieur the director of the hospital,” said he to him, “how many sick
people have you at the present moment?”


“Twenty-six, Monseigneur.”


“That was the number which I counted,” said the Bishop.

“The beds,” pursued the director, “are very much crowded against each
other.”


“That is what I observed.”


“The halls are nothing ﻿e’s self.”


This conversation took place in the gallery dining-room on the ground
floor.

The Bishop remained silent for a moment; then he turned abruptly to the
director of the hospital.

“Monsieur,” said he, “how many beds do you think this hall alone would
hold?”


“Monseigneur’s dining-room?” exclaimed the stupefied director.

The Bishop cast a glance round the apartment, and seemed to be taking
measures and calculations with his eyes.

“It would hold full twenty beds,” said he, as though speaking to
﻿el had no property, his family having been ruined by the
Revolution. His sister was in receipt of a yearly income of five
hundred francs, which sufficed for her personal wants at the vicarage.
M. Myriel received from the State, in his quality of bishop, a salary
of fifteen thousand francs. On the very day when he took up his abode
in the hospital, M. Myriel settled on the disposition of this sum once
for all, in the following manner. We transcribe here a note made by his
own hand:—

NOTE ON THE REGULATION ﻿es  . . . . . . . . . . . . .       50   ”
 Work for the amelioration of prisons  . . . . . . .      400   ”
 Work for the relief and delivery of prisoners . . .      500   ”
 To liberate fathers of families incarcerated for debt  1,000   ”
 Addition to the salary of the poor teachers of the
diocese  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .    2,000   ”
 Public granary of the Hautes-Alpes  . . . . . . . .      100   ”
 Congregation of the ladies of D——, of Manosque, and of
Sisteron, for the gratuitous instruc﻿
Baptistine. This holy woman regarded Monseigneur of D—— as at one and
the same time her brother and her bishop, her friend according to the
flesh and her superior according to the Church. She simply loved and
venerated him. When he spoke, she bowed; when he acted, she yielded her
adherence. Their only servant, Madame Magloire, grumbled a little. It
will be observed that Monsieur the Bishop had reserved for himself only
one thousand livres, which, added to the pension of Mademoiselle
Baptistine, made fifte﻿allowance which the department owes him for the
expense of his carriage in town, and for his journeys about the
diocese. It was customary for bishops in former days.”


“Hold!” cried the Bishop, “you are quite right, Madame Magloire.”


And he made his demand.

Some time afterwards the General Council took this demand under
consideration, and voted him an annual sum of three thousand francs,
under this heading: _Allowance to M. the Bishop for expenses of
carriage, expenses of posting, and expenses of pasto﻿thousand inhabitants? Expenses of journeys? What is the use of
these trips, in the first place? Next, how can the posting be
accomplished in these mountainous parts? There are no roads. No one
travels otherwise than on horseback. Even the bridge between Durance
and Château-Arnoux can barely support ox-teams. These priests are all
thus, greedy and avaricious. This man played the good priest when he
first came. Now he does like the rest; he must have a carriage and a
posting-chaise, he must have luxuries, li﻿es. Now here are three thousand
francs for us! At last!”


That same evening the Bishop wrote out and handed to his sister a
memorandum conceived in the following terms:—

EXPENSES OF CARRIAGE AND CIRCUIT.

For furnishing meat soup to the patients in the hospital. 1,500 livres
For the maternity charitable society of Aix . . . . . . .   250   ”
 For the maternity charitable society of Draguignan  . . .   250   ”
 For foundlings  . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . . .   500   ”
 For orphans   . . . . . . ﻿ door,—the latter in search of the alms
which the former came to deposit. In less than a year the Bishop had
become the treasurer of all benevolence and the cashier of all those in
distress. Considerable sums of money passed through his hands, but
nothing could induce him to make any change whatever in his mode of
life, or add anything superfluous to his bare necessities.

Far from it. As there is always more wretchedness below than there is
brotherhood above, all was given away, so to speak, before it was﻿example, and will also call
him thus when we have occasion to name him. Moreover, this appellation
pleased him.

“I like that name,” said he. “Bienvenu makes up for the Monseigneur.”


We do not claim that the portrait herewith presented is probable; we
confine ourselves to stating that it resembles the original.




CHAPTER III—A HARD BISHOPRIC FOR A GOOD BISHOP


The Bishop did not omit his pastoral visits because he had converted
his carriage into alms. The diocese of D—— is a fatiguing one. There
are v﻿episcopal city. He was
mounted on an ass. His purse, which was very dry at that moment, did
not permit him any other equipage. The mayor of the town came to
receive him at the gate of the town, and watched him dismount from his
ass, with scandalized eyes. Some of the citizens were laughing around
him. “Monsieur the Mayor,” said the Bishop, “and Messieurs Citizens, I
perceive that I shock you. You think it very arrogant in a poor priest
to ride an animal which was used by Jesus Christ. I have done so from
n﻿y rebuild their houses for
them gratuitously when they are ruined. Therefore it is a country which
is blessed by God. For a whole century, there has not been a single
murderer among them.”


In villages which were greedy for profit and harvest, he said: “Look at
the people of Embrun! If, at the harvest season, the father of a family
has his son away on service in the army, and his daughters at service
in the town, and if he is ill and incapacitated, the curé recommends
him to the prayers of the congregatio﻿y may
find husbands.” To the cantons which had a taste for lawsuits, and
where the farmers ruined themselves in stamped paper, he said: “Look at
those good peasants in the valley of Queyras! There are three thousand
souls of them. Mon Dieu! it is like a little republic. Neither judge
nor bailiff is known there. The mayor does everything. He allots the
imposts, taxes each person conscientiously, judges quarrels for
nothing, divides inheritances without charge, pronounces sentences
gratuitously; and he is ob﻿quill pens which they wear
in the cord of their hat. Those who teach reading only have one pen;
those who teach reading and reckoning have two pens; those who teach
reading, reckoning, and Latin have three pens. But what a disgrace to
be ignorant! Do like the people of Queyras!”


Thus he discoursed gravely and paternally; in default of examples, he
invented parables, going directly to the point, with few phrases and
many images, which characteristic formed the real eloquence of Jesus
Christ. And being con﻿adame Magloire,” said he, “fetch me a chair. My
greatness [_grandeur_] does not reach as far as that shelf.”


One of his distant relatives, Madame la Comtesse de Lô, rarely allowed
an opportunity to escape of enumerating, in his presence, what she
designated as “the expectations” of her three sons. She had numerous
relatives, who were very old and near to death, and of whom her sons
were the natural heirs. The youngest of the three was to receive from a
grandaunt a good hundred thousand livres of income; ﻿” replied the Bishop, “of a singular remark, which is to be
found, I believe, in St. Augustine,—‘Place your hopes in the man from
whom you do not inherit.’”


At another time, on receiving a notification of the decease of a
gentleman of the country-side, wherein not only the dignities of the
dead man, but also the feudal and noble qualifications of all his
relatives, spread over an entire page: “What a stout back Death has!”
he exclaimed. “What a strange burden of titles is cheerfully imposed on
him, and h﻿resented as charming and desirable. Among the audience there was a
wealthy retired merchant, who was somewhat of a usurer, named M.
Géborand, who had amassed two millions in the manufacture of coarse
cloth, serges, and woollen galloons. Never in his whole life had M.
Géborand bestowed alms on any poor wretch. After the delivery of that
sermon, it was observed that he gave a sou every Sunday to the poor old
beggar-women at the door of the cathedral. There were six of them to
share it. One day the Bishop cau﻿st and an ultra-Voltairian. This variety of man has
actually existed. When the Bishop came to him, he touched his arm,
_“You must give me something, M. le Marquis.”_ The Marquis turned round
and answered dryly, _“I have poor people of my own, Monseigneur.” “Give
them to me,”_ replied the Bishop.

One day he preached the following sermon in the cathedral:—

“My very dear brethren, my good friends, there are thirteen hundred and
twenty thousand peasants’ dwellings in France which have but three
openings; eig﻿ère, in the Var, in the two departments of
the Alpes, the Hautes, and the Basses, the peasants have not even
wheelbarrows; they transport their manure on the backs of men; they
have no candles, and they burn resinous sticks, and bits of rope dipped
in pitch. That is the state of affairs throughout the whole of the
hilly country of Dauphiné. They make bread for six months at one time;
they bake it with dried cow-dung. In the winter they break this bread
up with an axe, and they soak it for twenty-four hours﻿ and in the
mountains. He understood how to say the grandest things in the most
vulgar of idioms. As he spoke all tongues, he entered into all hearts.

Moreover, he was the same towards people of the world and towards the
lower classes. He condemned nothing in haste and without taking
circumstances into account. He said, “Examine the road over which the
fault has passed.”


Being, as he described himself with a smile, an _ex-sinner_, he had
none of the asperities of austerity, and he professed, with a good﻿e an upright man is the rule. Err,
fall, sin if you will, but be upright.

“The least possible sin is the law of man. No sin at all is the dream
of the angel. All which is terrestrial is subject to sin. Sin is a
gravitation.”


When he saw everyone exclaiming very loudly, and growing angry very
quickly, “Oh! oh!” he said, with a smile; “to all appearance, this is a
great crime which all the world commits. These are hypocrisies which
have taken fright, and are in haste to make protest and to put
themselves ﻿hadow; sin is therein committed. The guilty one is not the
person who has committed the sin, but the person who has created the
shadow.”


It will be perceived that he had a peculiar manner of his own of
judging things: I suspect that he obtained it from the Gospel.

One day he heard a criminal case, which was in preparation and on the
point of trial, discussed in a drawing-room. A wretched man, being at
the end of his resources, had coined counterfeit money, out of love for
a woman, and for the child whic﻿ cunningly
presented, in persuading the unfortunate woman that she had a rival,
and that the man was deceiving her. Thereupon, exasperated by jealousy,
she denounced her lover, confessed all, proved all.

The man was ruined. He was shortly to be tried at Aix with his
accomplice. They were relating the matter, and each one was expressing
enthusiasm over the cleverness of the magistrate. By bringing jealousy
into play, he had caused the truth to burst forth in wrath, he had
educed the justice of revenge. The﻿cution of the condemned man, the chaplain of the prison fell
ill. A priest was needed to attend the criminal in his last moments.
They sent for the curé. It seems that he refused to come, saying, “That
is no affair of mine. I have nothing to do with that unpleasant task,
and with that mountebank: I, too, am ill; and besides, it is not my
place.” This reply was reported to the Bishop, who said, _“Monsieur le
Curé is right: it is not his place; it is mine.”_

He went instantly to the prison, descended to the﻿ng on its mournful brink, he recoiled with horror. He was
not sufficiently ignorant to be absolutely indifferent. His
condemnation, which had been a profound shock, had, in a manner, broken
through, here and there, that wall which separates us from the mystery
of things, and which we call life. He gazed incessantly beyond this
world through these fatal breaches, and beheld only darkness. The
Bishop made him see light.

On the following day, when they came to fetch the unhappy wretch, the
Bishop was still t﻿ad him whom man slays; he
whom his brothers have rejected finds his Father once more. Pray,
believe, enter into life: the Father is there.” When he descended from
the scaffold, there was something in his look which made the people
draw aside to let him pass. They did not know which was most worthy of
admiration, his pallor or his serenity. On his return to the humble
dwelling, which he designated, with a smile, as _his palace_, he said
to his sister, _“I have just officiated pontifically.”_

Since the most﻿d, it has
something about it which produces hallucination. One may feel a certain
indifference to the death penalty, one may refrain from pronouncing
upon it, from saying yes or no, so long as one has not seen a
guillotine with one’s own eyes: but if one encounters one of them, the
shock is violent; one is forced to decide, and to take part for or
against. Some admire it, like de Maistre; others execrate it, like
Beccaria. The guillotine is the concretion of the law; it is called
_vindicate_; it is not neu﻿ that
this machine heard, that this mechanism understood, that this wood,
this iron, and these cords were possessed of will. In the frightful
meditation into which its presence casts the soul the scaffold appears
in terrible guise, and as though taking part in what is going on. The
scaffold is the accomplice of the executioner; it devours, it eats
flesh, it drinks blood; the scaffold is a sort of monster fabricated by
the judge and the carpenter, a spectre which seems to live with a
horrible vitality compo﻿ne which his sister overheard one evening and preserved: “I did not
think that it was so monstrous. It is wrong to become absorbed in the
divine law to such a degree as not to perceive human law. Death belongs
to God alone. By what right do men touch that unknown thing?”


In course of time these impressions weakened and probably vanished.
Nevertheless, it was observed that the Bishop thenceforth avoided
passing the place of execution.

M. Myriel could be summoned at any hour to the bedside of the sick and﻿e said:—

“Have a care of the manner in which you turn towards the dead. Think
not of that which perishes. Gaze steadily. You will perceive the living
light of your well-beloved dead in the depths of heaven.” He knew that
faith is wholesome. He sought to counsel and calm the despairing man,
by pointing out to him the resigned man, and to transform the grief
which gazes upon a grave by showing him the grief which fixes its gaze
upon a star.




CHAPTER V—MONSEIGNEUR BIENVENU MADE HIS CASSOCKS LAST TOO LONG
﻿lk
of his own cows. Then he set to work.

A Bishop is a very busy man: he must every day receive the secretary of
the bishopric, who is generally a canon, and nearly every day his
vicars-general. He has congregations to reprove, privileges to grant, a
whole ecclesiastical library to examine,—prayer-books, diocesan
catechisms, books of hours, etc.,—charges to write, sermons to
authorize, curés and mayors to reconcile, a clerical correspondence, an
administrative correspondence; on one side the State, on the﻿, when the weather was fine, he went forth and took a
stroll in the country or in town, often entering lowly dwellings. He
was seen walking alone, buried in his own thoughts, his eyes cast down,
supporting himself on his long cane, clad in his wadded purple garment
of silk, which was very warm, wearing purple stockings inside his
coarse shoes, and surmounted by a flat hat which allowed three golden
tassels of large bullion to droop from its three points.

It was a perfect festival wherever he appeared. One﻿ich.

As he made his cassocks last a long while, and did not wish to have it
noticed, he never went out in the town without his wadded purple cloak.
This inconvenienced him somewhat in summer.

On his return, he dined. The dinner resembled his breakfast.

At half-past eight in the evening he supped with his sister, Madame
Magloire standing behind them and serving them at table. Nothing could
be more frugal than this repast. If, however, the Bishop had one of his
curés to supper, Madame Magloire took advant﻿adame Magloire; then he retired to his own room and set to
writing, sometimes on loose sheets, and again on the margin of some
folio. He was a man of letters and rather learned. He left behind him
five or six very curious manuscripts; among others, a dissertation on
this verse in Genesis, _In the beginning, the spirit of God floated
upon the waters_. With this verse he compares three texts: the Arabic
verse which says, _The winds of God blew;_ Flavius Josephus who says,
_A wind from above was precipitated ﻿hich he had in his hand, he would suddenly fall into a profound
meditation, whence he only emerged to write a few lines on the pages of
the volume itself. These lines have often no connection whatever with
the book which contains them. We now have under our eyes a note written
by him on the margin of a quarto entitled _Correspondence of Lord
Germain with Generals Clinton, Cornwallis, and the Admirals on the
American station. Versailles, Poinçot, book-seller; and Paris, Pissot,
bookseller, Quai des Augustin﻿ck in the evening the two women retired and betook
themselves to their chambers on the first floor, leaving him alone
until morning on the ground floor.

It is necessary that we should, in this place, give an exact idea of
the dwelling of the Bishop of D——




CHAPTER VI—WHO GUARDED HIS HOUSE FOR HIM


The house in which he lived consisted, as we have said, of a ground
floor, and one story above; three rooms on the ground floor, three
chambers on the first, and an attic above. Behind the house was a
garden﻿ to country curates whom
business or the requirements of their parishes brought to D——

The pharmacy of the hospital, a small building which had been added to
the house, and abutted on the garden, had been transformed into a
kitchen and cellar. In addition to this, there was in the garden a
stable, which had formerly been the kitchen of the hospital, and in
which the Bishop kept two cows. No matter what the quantity of milk
they gave, he invariably sent half of it every morning to the sick
people in the ho﻿ ornamented with an
antique sideboard, painted pink, in water colors. Out of a similar
sideboard, properly draped with white napery and imitation lace, the
Bishop had constructed the altar which decorated his oratory.

His wealthy penitents and the sainted women of D—— had more than once
assessed themselves to raise the money for a new altar for
Monseigneur’s oratory; on each occasion he had taken the money and had
given it to the poor. “The most beautiful of altars,” he said, “is the
soul of an unhappy cr﻿r
the visitors. A room was dismantled for each new guest.

It sometimes happened that there were twelve in the party; the Bishop
then relieved the embarrassment of the situation by standing in front
of the chimney if it was winter, or by strolling in the garden if it
was summer.

There was still another chair in the detached alcove, but the straw was
half gone from it, and it had but three legs, so that it was of service
only when propped against the wall. Mademoiselle Baptistine had also in
her own room a﻿th a sofa. But
this would have cost five hundred francs at least, and in view of the
fact that she had only been able to lay by forty-two francs and ten
sous for this purpose in the course of five years, she had ended by
renouncing the idea. However, who is there who has attained his ideal?

Nothing is more easy to present to the imagination than the Bishop’s
bedchamber. A glazed door opened on the garden; opposite this was the
bed,—a hospital bed of iron, with a canopy of green serge; in the
shadow of the﻿ had formerly been silvered with
silver leaf, which was a sort of episcopal luxury; above the
chimney-piece hung a crucifix of copper, with the silver worn off,
fixed on a background of threadbare velvet in a wooden frame from which
the gilding had fallen; near the glass door a large table with an
inkstand, loaded with a confusion of papers and with huge volumes;
before the table an armchair of straw; in front of the bed a prie-Dieu,
borrowed from the oratory.

Two portraits in oval frames were fastened to﻿pecting
them. All that he knew about these two persons was, that they had been
appointed by the king, the one to his bishopric, the other to his
benefice, on the same day, the 27th of April, 1785. Madame Magloire
having taken the pictures down to dust, the Bishop had discovered these
particulars written in whitish ink on a little square of paper,
yellowed by time, and attached to the back of the portrait of the Abbé
of Grand-Champ with four wafers.

At his window he had an antique curtain of a coarse wooll﻿neath the
paper which had been washed over, paintings, ornamenting the apartment
of Mademoiselle Baptistine, as we shall see further on. Before becoming
a hospital, this house had been the ancient parliament house of the
Bourgeois. Hence this decoration. The chambers were paved in red
bricks, which were washed every week, with straw mats in front of all
the beds. Altogether, this dwelling, which was attended to by the two
women, was exquisitely clean from top to bottom. This was the sole
luxury which the B﻿e added two large candlesticks of massive
silver, which he had inherited from a great-aunt. These candlesticks
held two wax candles, and usually figured on the Bishop’s
chimney-piece. When he had any one to dinner, Madame Magloire lighted
the two candles and set the candlesticks on the table.

In the Bishop’s own chamber, at the head of his bed, there was a small
cupboard, in which Madame Magloire locked up the six silver knives and
forks and the big spoon every night. But it is necessary to add, that
the ﻿arked, with a sort of gentle malice: “Monseigneur, you who turn
everything to account, have, nevertheless, one useless plot. It would
be better to grow salads there than bouquets.” “Madame Magloire,”
retorted the Bishop, “you are mistaken. The beautiful is as useful as
the useful.” He added after a pause, “More so, perhaps.”


This plot, consisting of three or four beds, occupied the Bishop almost
as much as did his books. He liked to pass an hour or two there,
trimming, hoeing, and making holes here and t﻿er failing in these two respects, he watered his
flower-beds every summer evening with a tin watering-pot painted green.

The house had not a single door which could be locked. The door of the
dining-room, which, as we have said, opened directly on the cathedral
square, had formerly been ornamented with locks and bolts like the door
of a prison. The Bishop had had all this ironwork removed, and this
door was never fastened, either by night or by day, with anything
except the latch. All that the first passe﻿e, “This is
the shade of difference: the door of the physician should never be
shut, the door of the priest should always be open.”


On another book, entitled _Philosophy of the Medical Science_, he had
written this other note: “Am not I a physician like them? I also have
my patients, and then, too, I have some whom I call my unfortunates.”


Again he wrote: “Do not inquire the name of him who asks a shelter of
you. The very man who is embarrassed by his name is the one who needs
shelter.”


It chanced th﻿gentle gravity, and said
to him, _“Nisi Dominus custodierit domum, in vanum vigilant qui
custodiunt eam,” Unless the Lord guard the house, in vain do they watch
who guard it._

Then he spoke of something else.

He was fond of saying, “There is a bravery of the priest as well as the
bravery of a colonel of dragoons,—only,” he added, “ours must be
tranquil.”





CHAPTER VII—CRAVATTE


It is here that a fact falls naturally into place, which we must not
omit, because it is one of the sort which show us best ﻿ and thence he descended
towards the hamlets and villages through the ravines of Ubaye and
Ubayette.

He even pushed as far as Embrun, entered the cathedral one night, and
despoiled the sacristy. His highway robberies laid waste the
country-side. The gendarmes were set on his track, but in vain. He
always escaped; sometimes he resisted by main force. He was a bold
wretch. In the midst of all this terror the Bishop arrived. He was
making his circuit to Chastelar. The mayor came to meet him, and urged
him to﻿at!”


“There exists yonder in the mountains,” said the Bishop, “a tiny
community no bigger than that, which I have not seen for three years.
They are my good friends, those gentle and honest shepherds. They own
one goat out of every thirty that they tend. They make very pretty
woollen cords of various colors, and they play the mountain airs on
little flutes with six holes. They need to be told of the good God now
and then. What would they say to a bishop who was afraid? What would
they say if I did not go﻿bling his prayers?
Bah! To what purpose?”


“Oh, mon Dieu! what if you should meet them!”


“I should beg alms of them for my poor.”


“Do not go, Monseigneur. In the name of Heaven! You are risking your
life!”


“Monsieur le maire,” said the Bishop, “is that really all? I am not in
the world to guard my own life, but to guard souls.”


They had to allow him to do as he pleased. He set out, accompanied only
by a child who offered to serve as a guide. His obstinacy was bruited
about the country-side, and ca﻿ place at his disposal a wretched village sacristy, with a
few ancient chasubles of threadbare damask adorned with imitation lace.

“Bah!” said the Bishop. “Let us announce our _Te Deum_ from the pulpit,
nevertheless, Monsieur le Curé. Things will arrange themselves.”


They instituted a search in the churches of the neighborhood. All the
magnificence of these humble parishes combined would not have sufficed
to clothe the chorister of a cathedral properly.

While they were thus embarrassed, a large chest w﻿ of themselves?” said the
Bishop. Then he added, with a smile, “To him who contents himself with
the surplice of a curate, God sends the cope of an archbishop.”


“Monseigneur,” murmured the curé, throwing back his head with a smile.
“God—or the Devil.”


The Bishop looked steadily at the curé, and repeated with authority,
“God!”


When he returned to Chastelar, the people came out to stare at him as
at a curiosity, all along the road. At the priest’s house in Chastelar
he rejoined Mademoiselle Baptistine ﻿
real murderers. The great dangers lie within ourselves. What matters it
what threatens our head or our purse! Let us think only of that which
threatens our soul.”


Then, turning to his sister: “Sister, never a precaution on the part of
the priest, against his fellow-man. That which his fellow does, God
permits. Let us confine ourselves to prayer, when we think that a
danger is approaching us. Let us pray, not for ourselves, but that our
brother may not fall into sin on our account.”


However, such incid﻿ the adventure was completed;
it only remained to impart a new direction to the theft, and to cause
it to take a short trip in the direction of the poor. However, we make
no assertions on this point. Only, a rather obscure note was found
among the Bishop’s papers, which may bear some relation to this matter,
and which is couched in these terms, _“The question is, to decide
whether this should be turned over to the cathedral or to the
hospital.”_




CHAPTER VIII—PHILOSOPHY AFTER DRINKING


The senator abov﻿s, good opportunities, good
windfalls. Everything else seemed to him very stupid. He was
intelligent, and just sufficiently educated to think himself a disciple
of Epicurus; while he was, in reality, only a product of
Pigault-Lebrun. He laughed willingly and pleasantly over infinite and
eternal things, and at the “crotchets of that good old fellow the
Bishop.” He even sometimes laughed at him with an amiable authority in
the presence of M. Myriel himself, who listened to him.

On some semi-official occasio﻿ are on the bed of purple, senator.”


The senator was encouraged, and went on:—

“Let us be good fellows.”


“Good devils even,” said the Bishop.

“I declare to you,” continued the senator, “that the Marquis d’Argens,
Pyrrhon, Hobbes, and M. Naigeon are no rascals. I have all the
philosophers in my library gilded on the edges.”


“Like yourself, Count,” interposed the Bishop.

The senator resumed:—

“I hate Diderot; he is an ideologist, a declaimer, and a revolutionist,
a believer in God at bottom, and mo﻿which leaves me
in peace! Between you and me, and in order to empty my sack, and make
confession to my pastor, as it behooves me to do, I will admit to you
that I have good sense. I am not enthusiastic over your Jesus, who
preaches renunciation and sacrifice to the last extremity. ‘Tis the
counsel of an avaricious man to beggars. Renunciation; why? Sacrifice;
to what end? I do not see one wolf immolating himself for the happiness
of another wolf. Let us stick to nature, then. We are at the top; let
us have﻿t of my actions. When? After death. What
a fine dream! After my death it will be a very clever person who can
catch me. Have a handful of dust seized by a shadow-hand, if you can.
Let us tell the truth, we who are initiated, and who have raised the
veil of Isis: there is no such thing as either good or evil; there is
vegetation. Let us seek the real. Let us get to the bottom of it. Let
us go into it thoroughly. What the deuce! let us go to the bottom of
it! We must scent out the truth; dig in the earth for﻿en, besides, we shall see God. Ta, ta, ta! What twaddle
all these paradises are! God is a nonsensical monster. I would not say
that in the _Moniteur_, egad! but I may whisper it among friends.
_Inter pocula_. To sacrifice the world to paradise is to let slip the
prey for the shadow. Be the dupe of the infinite! I’m not such a fool.
I am a nought. I call myself Monsieur le Comte Nought, senator. Did I
exist before my birth? No. Shall I exist after death? No. What am I? A
little dust collected in an organism﻿is is the
vanishing-point. Death is death, believe me. I laugh at the idea of
there being any one who has anything to tell me on that subject. Fables
of nurses; bugaboo for children; Jehovah for men. No; our to-morrow is
the night. Beyond the tomb there is nothing but equal nothingness. You
have been Sardanapalus, you have been Vincent de Paul—it makes no
difference. That is the truth. Then live your life, above all things.
Make use of your _I_ while you have it. In truth, Bishop, I tell you
that I have a ﻿on for myself. The
good God is good for the populace.”


The Bishop clapped his hands.

“That’s talking!” he exclaimed. “What an excellent and really
marvellous thing is this materialism! Not every one who wants it can
have it. Ah! when one does have it, one is no longer a dupe, one does
not stupidly allow one’s self to be exiled like Cato, nor stoned like
Stephen, nor burned alive like Jeanne d’Arc. Those who have succeeded
in procuring this admirable materialism have the joy of feeling
themselves irrespo﻿elves,
which is exquisite, refined, accessible to the rich alone, good for all
sauces, and which seasons the voluptuousness of life admirably. This
philosophy has been extracted from the depths, and unearthed by special
seekers. But you are good-natured princes, and you do not think it a
bad thing that belief in the good God should constitute the philosophy
of the people, very much as the goose stuffed with chestnuts is the
truffled turkey of the poor.”





CHAPTER IX—THE BROTHER AS DEPICTED BY THE SISTER﻿etter is in our possession.

D——, Dec. 16, 18—. MY GOOD MADAM: Not a day passes without our speaking
of you. It is our established custom; but there is another reason
besides. Just imagine, while washing and dusting the ceilings and
walls, Madam Magloire has made some discoveries; now our two chambers
hung with antique paper whitewashed over, would not discredit a château
in the style of yours. Madam Magloire has pulled off all the paper.
There were things beneath. My drawing-room, which contains no
furnit﻿chus being knighted by Minerva in some
gardens, the name of which escapes me. In short, where the Roman ladies
repaired on one single night. What shall I say to you? I have Romans,
and Roman ladies [here occurs an illegible word], and the whole train.
Madam Magloire has cleaned it all off; this summer she is going to have
some small injuries repaired, and the whole revarnished, and my chamber
will be a regular museum. She has also found in a corner of the attic
two wooden pier-tables of ancient fashion. Th﻿ his own. When he talks, he says that a bishop
ought to be so. Just imagine! the door of our house is never fastened.
Whoever chooses to enter finds himself at once in my brother’s room. He
fears nothing, even at night. That is his sort of bravery, he says.

He does not wish me or Madame Magloire feel any fear for him. He
exposes himself to all sorts of dangers, and he does not like to have
us even seem to notice it. One must know how to understand him.

He goes out in the rain, he walks in the water, he t﻿ain from scolding
him a little, taking care, however, not to speak except when the
carriage was making a noise, so that no one might hear me.

At first I used to say to myself, “There are no dangers which will stop
him; he is terrible.” Now I have ended by getting used to it. I make a
sign to Madam Magloire that she is not to oppose him. He risks himself
as he sees fit. I carry off Madam Magloire, I enter my chamber, I pray
for him and fall asleep. I am at ease, because I know that if anything
were to happ﻿t, but the good God dwells here.

This suffices me. My brother has no longer any need of saying a word to
me. I understand him without his speaking, and we abandon ourselves to
the care of Providence. That is the way one has to do with a man who
possesses grandeur of soul.

I have interrogated my brother with regard to the information which you
desire on the subject of the Faux family. You are aware that he knows
everything, and that he has memories, because he is still a very good
royalist. They really ar﻿ritten
Faux, Fauq, and Faoucq.

Good Madame, recommend us to the prayers of your sainted relative,
Monsieur the Cardinal. As for your dear Sylvanie, she has done well in
not wasting the few moments which she passes with you in writing to me.
She is well, works as you would wish, and loves me.

That is all that I desire. The souvenir which she sent through you
reached me safely, and it makes me very happy. My health is not so very
bad, and yet I grow thinner every day. Farewell; my paper is at an end,
and t﻿ial feminine
genius which comprehends the man better than he comprehends himself.
The Bishop of D——, in spite of the gentle and candid air which never
deserted him, sometimes did things that were grand, bold, and
magnificent, without seeming to have even a suspicion of the fact. They
trembled, but they let him alone. Sometimes Madame Magloire essayed a
remonstrance in advance, but never at the time, nor afterwards. They
never interfered with him by so much as a word or sign, in any action
once entered upon﻿y understood, I will
not say his thought, but his nature, to such a degree that they no
longer watched over him. They confided him to God.

Moreover, Baptistine said, as we have just read, that her brother’s end
would prove her own. Madame Magloire did not say this, but she knew it.




CHAPTER X—THE BISHOP IN THE PRESENCE OF AN UNKNOWN LIGHT


At an epoch a little later than the date of the letter cited in the
preceding pages, he did a thing which, if the whole town was to be
believed, was even more hazar﻿the king, but almost. He was a
quasi-regicide. He had been a terrible man. How did it happen that such
a man had not been brought before a provost’s court, on the return of
the legitimate princes? They need not have cut off his head, if you
please; clemency must be exercised, agreed; but a good banishment for
life. An example, in short, etc. Besides, he was an atheist, like all
the rest of those people. Gossip of the geese about the vulture.

Was G—— a vulture after all? Yes; if he were to be judged by the﻿ch led thither had
disappeared under a growth of grass. The locality was spoken of as
though it had been the dwelling of a hangman.

Nevertheless, the Bishop meditated on the subject, and from time to
time he gazed at the horizon at a point where a clump of trees marked
the valley of the former member of the Convention, and he said, “There
is a soul yonder which is lonely.”


And he added, deep in his own mind, “I owe him a visit.”


But, let us avow it, this idea, which seemed natural at the first
blush, ﻿n he returned.

Finally, the rumor one day spread through the town that a sort of young
shepherd, who served the member of the Convention in his hovel, had
come in quest of a doctor; that the old wretch was dying, that
paralysis was gaining on him, and that he would not live over
night.—“Thank God!” some added.

The Bishop took his staff, put on his cloak, on account of his too
threadbare cassock, as we have mentioned, and because of the evening
breeze which was sure to rise soon, and set out.

The sun was﻿nailed
against the outside.

Near the door, in an old wheel-chair, the armchair of the peasants,
there was a white-haired man, smiling at the sun.

Near the seated man stood a young boy, the shepherd lad. He was
offering the old man a jar of milk.

While the Bishop was watching him, the old man spoke: “Thank you,” he
said, “I need nothing.” And his smile quitted the sun to rest upon the
child.

The Bishop stepped forward. At the sound which he made in walking, the
old man turned his head, and his face expr﻿tended his hand to the Bishop, but the
Bishop did not take it. The Bishop confined himself to the remark:—

“I am pleased to see that I have been misinformed. You certainly do not
seem to me to be ill.”


“Monsieur,” replied the old man, “I am going to recover.”


He paused, and then said:—

“I shall die three hours hence.”


Then he continued:—

“I am something of a doctor; I know in what fashion the last hour draws
on. Yesterday, only my feet were cold; to-day, the chill has ascended
to my knees; now I f﻿Dying is a simple affair.
One has no need of the light for that. So be it. I shall die by
starlight.”


The old man turned to the shepherd lad:—

“Go to thy bed; thou wert awake all last night; thou art tired.”


The child entered the hut.

The old man followed him with his eyes, and added, as though speaking
to himself:—

“I shall die while he sleeps. The two slumbers may be good neighbors.”


The Bishop was not touched as it seems that he should have been. He did
not think he discerned God in this manner﻿powerful ones of the earth; for the first time in his life, probably,
the Bishop felt in a mood to be severe.

Meanwhile, the member of the Convention had been surveying him with a
modest cordiality, in which one could have distinguished, possibly,
that humility which is so fitting when one is on the verge of returning
to dust.

The Bishop, on his side, although he generally restrained his
curiosity, which, in his opinion, bordered on a fault, could not
refrain from examining the member of the Convention w﻿n one was conscious of a man put to the proof. Though so
near to his end, he preserved all the gestures of health. In his clear
glance, in his firm tone, in the robust movement of his shoulders,
there was something calculated to disconcert death. Azrael, the
Mohammedan angel of the sepulchre, would have turned back, and thought
that he had mistaken the door. G—— seemed to be dying because he willed
it so. There was freedom in his agony. His legs alone were motionless.
It was there that the shadows held him﻿lying the words “after all.” He replied. The smile had
quite disappeared from his face.

“Do not congratulate me too much, sir. I did vote for the death of the
tyrant.”


It was the tone of austerity answering the tone of severity.

“What do you mean to say?” resumed the Bishop.

“I mean to say that man has a tyrant,—ignorance. I voted for the death
of that tyrant. That tyrant engendered royalty, which is authority
falsely understood, while science is authority rightly understood. Man
should be governed on﻿, the end of slavery for man, the end of night
for the child. In voting for the Republic, I voted for that. I voted
for fraternity, concord, the dawn. I have aided in the overthrow of
prejudices and errors. The crumbling away of prejudices and errors
causes light. We have caused the fall of the old world, and the old
world, that vase of miseries, has become, through its upsetting upon
the human race, an urn of joy.”


“Mixed joy,” said the Bishop.

“You may say troubled joy, and to-day, after that fatal re﻿y case, and in spite of whatever may be said, the French
Revolution is the most important step of the human race since the
advent of Christ. Incomplete, it may be, but sublime. It set free all
the unknown social quantities; it softened spirits, it calmed,
appeased, enlightened; it caused the waves of civilization to flow over
the earth. It was a good thing. The French Revolution is the
consecration of humanity.”


The Bishop could not refrain from murmuring:—

“Yes? ’93!”


The member of the Convention str﻿he judge speaks in the name of justice; the priest speaks in the name
of pity, which is nothing but a more lofty justice. A thunderbolt
should commit no error.” And he added, regarding the member of the
Convention steadily the while, “Louis XVII.?”


The conventionary stretched forth his hand and grasped the Bishop’s
arm.

“Louis XVII.! let us see. For whom do you mourn? is it for the innocent
child? very good; in that case I mourn with you. Is it for the royal
child? I demand time for reflection. To me, t﻿ almost regretted having come,
and yet he felt vaguely and strangely shaken.

The conventionary resumed:—

“Ah, Monsieur Priest, you love not the crudities of the true. Christ
loved them. He seized a rod and cleared out the Temple. His scourge,
full of lightnings, was a harsh speaker of truths. When he cried,
_‘Sinite parvulos,’_ he made no distinction between the little
children. It would not have embarrassed him to bring together the
Dauphin of Barabbas and the Dauphin of Herod. Innocence, Monsieur, is
i﻿onounced, I must
admit; but that signifies nothing: clever men have so many ways of
imposing on that honest goodman, the people. By the way, I did not hear
the sound of your carriage; you have left it yonder, behind the coppice
at the fork of the roads, no doubt. I do not know you, I tell you. You
have told me that you are the Bishop; but that affords me no
information as to your moral personality. In short, I repeat my
question. Who are you? You are a bishop; that is to say, a prince of
the church, one of﻿ts, good table, all the
sensualities of life; you have this like the rest, and like the rest,
you enjoy it; it is well; but this says either too much or too little;
this does not enlighten me upon the intrinsic and essential value of
the man who comes with the probable intention of bringing wisdom to me.
To whom do I speak? Who are you?”


The Bishop hung his head and replied, _“Vermis sum_—I am a worm.”


“A worm of the earth in a carriage?” growled the conventionary.

It was the conventionary’s turn to b﻿ pardon me. I have
just committed a wrong, sir. You are at my house, you are my guest, I
owe you courtesy. You discuss my ideas, and it becomes me to confine
myself to combating your arguments. Your riches and your pleasures are
advantages which I hold over you in the debate; but good taste dictates
that I shall not make use of them. I promise you to make no use of them
in the future.”


“I thank you,” said the Bishop.

G—— resumed.

“Let us return to the explanation which you have asked of me. Where
were ﻿aguely wounded by the want of respect of logic.

The conventionary began to pant; the asthma of the agony which is
mingled with the last breaths interrupted his voice; still, there was a
perfect lucidity of soul in his eyes. He went on:—

“Let me say a few words more in this and that direction; I am willing.
Apart from the Revolution, which, taken as a whole, is an immense human
affirmation, ’93 is, alas! a rejoinder. You think it inexorable, sir;
but what of the whole monarchy, sir? Carrier is a bandit; b﻿ile with a nursing infant, was bound, naked to the waist,
to a stake, and the child kept at a distance; her breast swelled with
milk and her heart with anguish; the little one, hungry and pale,
beheld that breast and cried and agonized; the executioner said to the
woman, a mother and a nurse, ‘Abjure!’ giving her her choice between
the death of her infant and the death of her conscience. What say you
to that torture of Tantalus as applied to a mother? Bear this well in
mind sir: the French Revolution had i﻿hat it has progressed.”


The conventionary doubted not that he had successively conquered all
the inmost intrenchments of the Bishop. One remained, however, and from
this intrenchment, the last resource of Monseigneur Bienvenu’s
resistance, came forth this reply, wherein appeared nearly all the
harshness of the beginning:—

“Progress should believe in God. Good cannot have an impious servitor.
He who is an atheist is but a bad leader for the human race.”


The former representative of the people made no r﻿ld be without limit; it would not be infinite; in other words, it
would not exist. There is, then, an _I_. That _I_ of the infinite is
God.”


The dying man had pronounced these last words in a loud voice, and with
the shiver of ecstasy, as though he beheld some one. When he had
spoken, his eyes closed. The effort had exhausted him. It was evident
that he had just lived through in a moment the few hours which had been
left to him. That which he had said brought him nearer to him who is in
death. The suprem﻿, with a slowness which probably arose more from his
dignity of soul than from the failing of his strength, “I have passed
my life in meditation, study, and contemplation. I was sixty years of
age when my country called me and commanded me to concern myself with
its affairs. I obeyed. Abuses existed, I combated them; tyrannies
existed, I destroyed them; rights and principles existed, I proclaimed
and confessed them. Our territory was invaded, I defended it; France
was menaced, I offered my breast. I was no﻿ce,
forward towards the light, and I have sometimes resisted progress
without pity. I have, when the occasion offered, protected my own
adversaries, men of your profession. And there is at Peteghem, in
Flanders, at the very spot where the Merovingian kings had their summer
palace, a convent of Urbanists, the Abbey of Sainte Claire en Beaulieu,
which I saved in 1793. I have done my duty according to my powers, and
all the good that I was able. After which, I was hunted down, pursued,
persecuted, blackened, ﻿onventionary
had become august. He had just expired.

The Bishop returned home, deeply absorbed in thoughts which cannot be
known to us. He passed the whole night in prayer. On the following
morning some bold and curious persons attempted to speak to him about
member of the Convention G——; he contented himself with pointing
heavenward.

From that moment he redoubled his tenderness and brotherly feeling
towards all children and sufferers.

Any allusion to “that old wretch of a G——” caused him to fall into a﻿to be
seen there? He must have been very curious indeed to see a soul carried
off by the devil.”


One day a dowager of the impertinent variety who thinks herself
spiritual, addressed this sally to him, “Monseigneur, people are
inquiring when Your Greatness will receive the red cap!”—“Oh! oh!
that’s a coarse color,” replied the Bishop. “It is lucky that those who
despise it in a cap revere it in a hat.”





CHAPTER XI—A RESTRICTION


We should incur a great risk of deceiving ourselves, were we to
conclude﻿
Let us, then, go back a few years.

Some time after the elevation of M. Myriel to the episcopate, the
Emperor had made him a baron of the Empire, in company with many other
bishops. The arrest of the Pope took place, as every one knows, on the
night of the 5th to the 6th of July, 1809; on this occasion, M. Myriel
was summoned by Napoleon to the synod of the bishops of France and
Italy convened at Paris. This synod was held at Notre-Dame, and
assembled for the first time on the 15th of June, 1811, under th﻿etrated to them through me. I produced on them
the effect of an open door.”_

On another occasion he said, _“What would you have? Those gentlemen are
princes. I am only a poor peasant bishop.”_

The fact is that he displeased them. Among other strange things, it is
said that he chanced to remark one evening, when he found himself at
the house of one of his most notable colleagues: “What beautiful
clocks! What beautiful carpets! What beautiful liveries! They must be a
great trouble. I would not have all tho﻿glish
gaiters!” he said; _“let him take himself off to Prussia with that
queue of his.”_ He was happy to combine in the same imprecation the two
things which he most detested, Prussia and England. He did it so often
that he lost his place. There he was, turned out of the house, with his
wife and children, and without bread. The Bishop sent for him, reproved
him gently, and appointed him beadle in the cathedral.

In the course of nine years Monseigneur Bienvenu had, by dint of holy
deeds and gentle manners,﻿,” callow priests. Every career has its aspirants, who form
a train for those who have attained eminence in it. There is no power
which has not its dependents. There is no fortune which has not its
court. The seekers of the future eddy around the splendid present.
Every metropolis has its staff of officials. Every bishop who possesses
the least influence has about him his patrol of cherubim from the
seminary, which goes the round, and maintains good order in the
episcopal palace, and mounts guard over mons﻿in their person, who are connecting
links between the sacristy and diplomacy, who are abbés rather than
priests, prelates rather than bishops. Happy those who approach them!
Being persons of influence, they create a shower about them, upon the
assiduous and the favored, and upon all the young men who understand
the art of pleasing, of large parishes, prebends, archidiaconates,
chaplaincies, and cathedral posts, while awaiting episcopal honors. As
they advance themselves, they cause their satellites to prog﻿ are an auditor, then a papal chamberlain, then
monsignor, and from a Grace to an Eminence is only a step, and between
the Eminence and the Holiness there is but the smoke of a ballot. Every
skull-cap may dream of the tiara. The priest is nowadays the only man
who can become a king in a regular manner; and what a king! the supreme
king. Then what a nursery of aspirations is a seminary! How many
blushing choristers, how many youthful abbés bear on their heads
Perrette’s pot of milk! Who knows how easy it is﻿good old
men, rather vulgar like himself, walled up like him in this diocese,
without exit to a cardinalship, and who resembled their bishop, with
this difference, that they were finished and he was completed. The
impossibility of growing great under Monseigneur Bienvenu was so well
understood, that no sooner had the young men whom he ordained left the
seminary than they got themselves recommended to the archbishops of Aix
or of Auch, and went off in a great hurry. For, in short, we repeat it,
men wish to ﻿y hideous thing. Its false
resemblance to merit deceives men. For the masses, success has almost
the same profile as supremacy. Success, that Menæchmus of talent, has
one dupe,—history. Juvenal and Tacitus alone grumble at it. In our day,
a philosophy which is almost official has entered into its service,
wears the livery of success, and performs the service of its
antechamber. Succeed: theory. Prosperity argues capacity. Win in the
lottery, and behold! you are a clever man. He who triumphs is
venerated. B﻿e of which one is Moses, Æschylus, Dante,
Michael Angelo, or Napoleon, the multitude awards on the spot, and by
acclamation, to whomsoever attains his object, in whatsoever it may
consist. Let a notary transfigure himself into a deputy: let a false
Corneille compose _Tiridate;_ let a eunuch come to possess a harem; let
a military Prudhomme accidentally win the decisive battle of an epoch;
let an apothecary invent cardboard shoe-soles for the army of the
Sambre-and-Meuse, and construct for himself, out of t﻿ons of space they confound the stars of the abyss which are
made in the soft mire of the puddle by the feet of ducks.




CHAPTER XIII—WHAT HE BELIEVED


We are not obliged to sound the Bishop of D—— on the score of
orthodoxy. In the presence of such a soul we feel ourselves in no mood
but respect. The conscience of the just man should be accepted on his
word. Moreover, certain natures being given, we admit the possible
development of all beauties of human virtue in a belief that differs
from our own.

Wha﻿ to a man, “Thou art with God!”


The point which we consider it our duty to note is, that outside of and
beyond his faith, as it were, the Bishop possessed an excess of love.
It was in that quarter, _quia multum amavit_,—because he loved
much—that he was regarded as vulnerable by “serious men,” “grave
persons” and “reasonable people”; favorite locutions of our sad world
where egotism takes its word of command from pedantry. What was this
excess of love? It was a serene benevolence which overflowed men, as﻿mity of instinct, troubled him not, and did
not arouse his indignation. He was touched, almost softened by them. It
seemed as though he went thoughtfully away to seek beyond the bounds of
life which is apparent, the cause, the explanation, or the excuse for
them. He seemed at times to be asking God to commute these penalties.
He examined without wrath, and with the eye of a linguist who is
deciphering a palimpsest, that portion of chaos which still exists in
nature. This reverie sometimes caused him to utt﻿ in his effort to avoid stepping on an ant. Thus lived this just
man. Sometimes he fell asleep in his garden, and then there was nothing
more venerable possible.

Monseigneur Bienvenu had formerly been, if the stories anent his youth,
and even in regard to his manhood, were to be believed, a passionate,
and, possibly, a violent man. His universal suavity was less an
instinct of nature than the result of a grand conviction which had
filtered into his heart through the medium of life, and had trickled
there ﻿ot pretend to draw any
conclusion. Gregory XVI., at the age of eighty, held himself erect and
smiling, which did not prevent him from being a bad bishop. Monseigneur
Welcome had what the people term a “fine head,” but so amiable was he
that they forgot that it was fine.

When he conversed with that infantile gayety which was one of his
charms, and of which we have already spoken, people felt at their ease
with him, and joy seemed to radiate from his whole person. His fresh
and ruddy complexion, his very wh﻿adually transfigured, and took on some imposing quality, I know not
what; his broad and serious brow, rendered august by his white locks,
became august also by virtue of meditation; majesty radiated from his
goodness, though his goodness ceased not to be radiant; one experienced
something of the emotion which one would feel on beholding a smiling
angel slowly unfold his wings, without ceasing to smile. Respect, an
unutterable respect, penetrated you by degrees and mounted to your
heart, and one felt that o﻿to a string;
trousers of blue drilling, worn and threadbare, white on one knee and
torn on the other; an old gray, tattered blouse, patched on one of the
elbows with a bit of green cloth sewed on with twine; a tightly packed
soldier knapsack, well buckled and perfectly new, on his back; an
enormous, knotty stick in his hand; iron-shod shoes on his stockingless
feet; a shaved head and a long beard.

The sweat, the heat, the journey on foot, the dust, added I know not
what sordid quality to this dilapidated ﻿ent market town which is
situated below the city had seen him pause beneath the trees of the
boulevard Gassendi, and drink at the fountain which stands at the end
of the promenade. He must have been very thirsty: for the children who
followed him saw him stop again for a drink, two hundred paces further
on, at the fountain in the market-place.

On arriving at the corner of the Rue Poichevert, he turned to the left,
and directed his steps toward the town-hall. He entered, then came out
a quarter of an hour ﻿ndlord a certain Jacquin Labarre, a man
of consideration in the town on account of his relationship to another
Labarre, who kept the inn of the _Three Dauphins_ in Grenoble, and had
served in the Guides. At the time of the Emperor’s landing, many rumors
had circulated throughout the country with regard to this inn of the
_Three Dauphins_. It was said that General Bertrand, disguised as a
carter, had made frequent trips thither in the month of January, and
that he had distributed crosses of honor to the sol﻿ of the man of Grenoble.”_

The man bent his steps towards this inn, which was the best in the
country-side. He entered the kitchen, which opened on a level with the
street. All the stoves were lighted; a huge fire blazed gayly in the
fireplace. The host, who was also the chief cook, was going from one
stew-pan to another, very busily superintending an excellent dinner
designed for the wagoners, whose loud talking, conversation, and
laughter were audible from an adjoining apartment. Any one who has
travell﻿ook in the traveller’s appearance with a single glance, and added, “By
paying for it.”


The man drew a large leather purse from the pocket of his blouse, and
answered, “I have money.”


“In that case, we are at your service,” said the host.

The man put his purse back in his pocket, removed his knapsack from his
back, put it on the ground near the door, retained his stick in his
hand, and seated himself on a low stool close to the fire. D—— is in
the mountains. The evenings are cold there in October.

But﻿med to serve him in the capacity both of scullion and
lackey. The landlord whispered a word in the scullion’s ear, and the
child set off on a run in the direction of the town-hall.

The traveller saw nothing of all this.

Once more he inquired, “Will dinner be ready soon?”


“Immediately,” responded the host.

The child returned. He brought back the paper. The host unfolded it
eagerly, like a person who is expecting a reply. He seemed to read it
attentively, then tossed his head, and remained thoughtful fo﻿horses take up all the space.”


“Very well!” retorted the man; “a corner of the loft then, a truss of
straw. We will see about that after dinner.”


“I cannot give you any dinner.”


This declaration, made in a measured but firm tone, struck the stranger
as grave. He rose.

“Ah! bah! But I am dying of hunger. I have been walking since sunrise.
I have travelled twelve leagues. I pay. I wish to eat.”


“I have nothing,” said the landlord.

The man burst out laughing, and turned towards the fireplace and the﻿ard and thrusting some
brands into the fire with the iron-shod tip of his staff; he turned
quickly round, and as he opened his mouth to reply, the host gazed
steadily at him and added, still in a low voice: “Stop! there’s enough
of that sort of talk. Do you want me to tell you your name? Your name
is Jean Valjean. Now do you want me to tell you who you are? When I saw
you come in I suspected something; I sent to the town-hall, and this
was the reply that was sent to me. Can you read?”


So saying, he held ﻿ot
turn round a single time. Had he done so, he would have seen the host
of the _Cross of Colbas_ standing on his threshold, surrounded by all
the guests of his inn, and all the passers-by in the street, talking
vivaciously, and pointing him out with his finger; and, from the
glances of terror and distrust cast by the group, he might have divined
that his arrival would speedily become an event for the whole town.

He saw nothing of all this. People who are crushed do not look behind
them. They know but too﻿the end of the streets; a pine branch
suspended from a cross-beam of iron was outlined against the white sky
of the twilight. He proceeded thither.

It proved to be, in fact, a public house. The public house which is in
the Rue de Chaffaut.

The wayfarer halted for a moment, and peeped through the window into
the interior of the low-studded room of the public house, illuminated
by a small lamp on a table and by a large fire on the hearth. Some men
were engaged in drinking there. The landlord was warming hi﻿ere drinking turned round. The lamp
illuminated him on one side, the firelight on the other. They examined
him for some time while he was taking off his knapsack.

The host said to him, “There is the fire. The supper is cooking in the
pot. Come and warm yourself, comrade.”


He approached and seated himself near the hearth. He stretched out his
feet, which were exhausted with fatigue, to the fire; a fine odor was
emitted by the pot. All that could be distinguished of his face,
beneath his cap, which was we﻿arre’s. It chanced that he had that very morning
encountered this unprepossessing stranger on the road between Bras
d’Asse and—I have forgotten the name. I think it was Escoublon. Now,
when he met him, the man, who then seemed already extremely weary, had
requested him to take him on his crupper; to which the fishmonger had
made no reply except by redoubling his gait. This fishmonger had been a
member half an hour previously of the group which surrounded Jacquin
Labarre, and had himself related his disagre﻿from the other inn.”


“And you are to be turned out of this one.”


“Where would you have me go?”


“Elsewhere.”


The man took his stick and his knapsack and departed.

As he went out, some children who had followed him from the _Cross of
Colbas_, and who seemed to be lying in wait for him, threw stones at
him. He retraced his steps in anger, and threatened them with his
stick: the children dispersed like a flock of birds.

He passed before the prison. At the door hung an iron chain attached to
a bell. H﻿at night! One goes out. Black as ovens, indeed! And I say,
Monseigneur, and Mademoiselle there says with me—”


“I,” interrupted his sister, “say nothing. What my brother does is well
done.”


Madame Magloire continued as though there had been no protest:—

“We say that this house is not safe at all; that if Monseigneur will
permit, I will go and tell Paulin Musebois, the locksmith, to come and
replace the ancient locks on the doors; we have them, and it is only
the work of a moment; for I say that nothing﻿th a rapid movement, as though some one had given it
an energetic and resolute push.

A man entered.

We already know the man. It was the wayfarer whom we have seen
wandering about in search of shelter.

He entered, advanced a step, and halted, leaving the door open behind
him. He had his knapsack on his shoulders, his cudgel in his hand, a
rough, audacious, weary, and violent expression in his eyes. The fire
on the hearth lighted him up. He was hideous. It was a sinister
apparition.

Madame Magloire had n﻿t the old
man and the two women, and without waiting for the Bishop to speak, he
said, in a loud voice:—

“See here. My name is Jean Valjean. I am a convict from the galleys. I
have passed nineteen years in the galleys. I was liberated four days
ago, and am on my way to Pontarlier, which is my destination. I have
been walking for four days since I left Toulon. I have travelled a
dozen leagues to-day on foot. This evening, when I arrived in these
parts, I went to an inn, and they turned me out, because of m﻿recess of a doorway. Yonder, in the square, I meant
to sleep on a stone bench. A good woman pointed out your house to me,
and said to me, ‘Knock there!’ I have knocked. What is this place? Do
you keep an inn? I have money—savings. One hundred and nine francs
fifteen sous, which I earned in the galleys by my labor, in the course
of nineteen years. I will pay. What is that to me? I have money. I am
very weary; twelve leagues on foot; I am very hungry. Are you willing
that I should remain?”


“Madame Magloire﻿e is a school there for
those who choose to learn. Hold, this is what they put on this
passport: ‘Jean Valjean, discharged convict, native of’—that is nothing
to you—‘has been nineteen years in the galleys: five years for
house-breaking and burglary; fourteen years for having attempted to
escape on four occasions. He is a very dangerous man.’ There! Every one
has cast me out. Are you willing to receive me? Is this an inn? Will
you give me something to eat and a bed? Have you a stable?”


“Madame Magloire,”﻿nd became extraordinary. He began
stammering like a crazy man:—

“Really? What! You will keep me? You do not drive me forth? A convict!
You call me _sir!_ You do not address me as _thou?_ ‘Get out of here,
you dog!’ is what people always say to me. I felt sure that you would
expel me, so I told you at once who I am. Oh, what a good woman that
was who directed me hither! I am going to sup! A bed with a mattress
and sheets, like the rest of the world! a bed! It is nineteen years
since I have slept in a bed! ﻿kull-cap.”


As he spoke, he deposited his knapsack and his cudgel in a corner,
replaced his passport in his pocket, and seated himself. Mademoiselle
Baptistine gazed mildly at him. He continued:

“You are humane, Monsieur le Curé; you have not scorned me. A good
priest is a very good thing. Then you do not require me to pay?”


“No,” said the Bishop; “keep your money. How much have you? Did you not
tell me one hundred and nine francs?”


“And fifteen sous,” added the man.

“One hundred and nine francs fif﻿r curés, you understand. Pardon me, I
say that very badly; but it is such a far-off thing to me! You
understand what we are! He said mass in the middle of the galleys, on
an altar. He had a pointed thing, made of gold, on his head; it
glittered in the bright light of midday. We were all ranged in lines on
the three sides, with cannons with lighted matches facing us. We could
not see very well. He spoke; but he was too far off, and we did not
hear. That is what a bishop is like.”


While he was speaking, th﻿ one of the shipwrecked of the
_Medusa_. Ignominy thirsts for consideration.

“This lamp gives a very bad light,” said the Bishop.

Madame Magloire understood him, and went to get the two silver
candlesticks from the chimney-piece in Monseigneur’s bed-chamber, and
placed them, lighted, on the table.

“Monsieur le Curé,” said the man, “you are good; you do not despise me.
You receive me into your house. You light your candles for me. Yet I
have not concealed from you whence I come and that I am an unfortuna﻿home here than I am myself. Everything here is yours. What need
have I to know your name? Besides, before you told me you had one which
I knew.”


The man opened his eyes in astonishment.

“Really? You knew what I was called?”


“Yes,” replied the Bishop, “you are called my brother.”


“Stop, Monsieur le Curé,” exclaimed the man. “I was very hungry when I
entered here; but you are so good, that I no longer know what has
happened to me.”


The Bishop looked at him, and said,—

“You have suffered much?”


“O﻿ust men. If
you emerge from that sad place with thoughts of hatred and of wrath
against mankind, you are deserving of pity; if you emerge with thoughts
of good-will and of peace, you are more worthy than any one of us.”


In the meantime, Madame Magloire had served supper: soup, made with
water, oil, bread, and salt; a little bacon, a bit of mutton, figs, a
fresh cheese, and a large loaf of rye bread. She had, of her own
accord, added to the Bishop’s ordinary fare a bottle of his old Mauves
wine.

The Bish﻿ Magloire had, in fact, only placed the three sets of forks and
spoons which were absolutely necessary. Now, it was the usage of the
house, when the Bishop had any one to supper, to lay out the whole six
sets of silver on the table-cloth—an innocent ostentation. This
graceful semblance of luxury was a kind of child’s play, which was full
of charm in that gentle and severe household, which raised poverty into
dignity.

Madame Magloire understood the remark, went out without saying a word,
and a moment later﻿uteness.

“. . . This man paid no attention to any one. He ate with the voracity
of a starving man. However, after supper he said:

“‘Monsieur le Curé of the good God, all this is far too good for me;
but I must say that the carters who would not allow me to eat with them
keep a better table than you do.’

“Between ourselves, the remark rather shocked me. My brother replied:—

“‘They are more fatigued than I.’

“‘No,’ returned the man, ‘they have more money. You are poor; I see
that plainly. You cannot be ﻿and
felt that he was becoming wicked; he there condemned Providence, and
was conscious that he was becoming impious.

It is difficult not to indulge in meditation at this point.

Does human nature thus change utterly and from top to bottom? Can the
man created good by God be rendered wicked by man? Can the soul be
completely made over by fate, and become evil, fate being evil? Can the
heart become misshapen and contract incurable deformities and
infirmities under the oppression of a disproportionate unhapp﻿ hours of repose, which were for Jean
Valjean hours of reverie, this gloomy galley-slave, seated with folded
arms upon the bar of some capstan, with the end of his chain thrust
into his pocket to prevent its dragging, serious, silent, and
thoughtful, a pariah of the laws which regarded the man with wrath,
condemned by civilization, and regarding heaven with severity.

Certainly,—and we make no attempt to dissimulate the fact,—the
observing physiologist would have beheld an irremediable misery; he
would, pe﻿to render it for those
who read us? Did Jean Valjean distinctly perceive, after their
formation, and had he seen distinctly during the process of their
formation, all the elements of which his moral misery was composed? Had
this rough and unlettered man gathered a perfectly clear perception of
the succession of ideas through which he had, by degrees, mounted and
descended to the lugubrious aspects which had, for so many years,
formed the inner horizon of his spirit? Was he conscious of all that
passed with﻿ way like a blind man and a
dreamer. Only, at intervals, there suddenly came to him, from without
and from within, an access of wrath, a surcharge of suffering, a livid
and rapid flash which illuminated his whole soul, and caused to appear
abruptly all around him, in front, behind, amid the gleams of a
frightful light, the hideous precipices and the sombre perspective of
his destiny.

The flash passed, the night closed in again; and where was he? He no
longer knew. The peculiarity of pains of this nature, ﻿ecting for an instant on the result, nor on the experiences
which he had already gone through. He escaped impetuously, like the
wolf who finds his cage open. Instinct said to him, “Flee!” Reason
would have said, “Remain!” But in the presence of so violent a
temptation, reason vanished; nothing remained but instinct. The beast
alone acted. When he was recaptured, the fresh severities inflicted on
him only served to render him still more wild.

One detail, which we must not omit, is that he possessed a physi﻿amed him Jean the Jack-screw. Once, when they
were repairing the balcony of the town-hall at Toulon, one of those
admirable caryatids of Puget, which support the balcony, became
loosened, and was on the point of falling. Jean Valjean, who was
present, supported the caryatid with his shoulder, and gave the workmen
time to arrive.

His suppleness even exceeded his strength. Certain convicts who were
forever dreaming of escape, ended by making a veritable science of
force and skill combined. It is the science﻿y prison.

He spoke but little. He laughed not at all. An excessive emotion was
required to wring from him, once or twice a year, that lugubrious laugh
of the convict, which is like the echo of the laugh of a demon. To all
appearance, he seemed to be occupied in the constant contemplation of
something terrible.

He was absorbed, in fact.

Athwart the unhealthy perceptions of an incomplete nature and a crushed
intelligence, he was confusedly conscious that some monstrous thing was
resting on him. In that ob﻿ near him, now
afar off and on inaccessible table-lands, some group, some detail,
vividly illuminated; here the galley-sergeant and his cudgel; there the
gendarme and his sword; yonder the mitred archbishop; away at the top,
like a sort of sun, the Emperor, crowned and dazzling. It seemed to him
that these distant splendors, far from dissipating his night, rendered
it more funereal and more black. All this—laws, prejudices, deeds, men,
things—went and came above him, over his head, in accordance with the
c﻿ this situation Jean Valjean meditated; and what could be the nature
of his meditation?

If the grain of millet beneath the millstone had thoughts, it would,
doubtless, think that same thing which Jean Valjean thought.

All these things, realities full of spectres, phantasmagories full of
realities, had eventually created for him a sort of interior state
which is almost indescribable.

At times, amid his convict toil, he paused. He fell to thinking. His
reason, at one and the same time riper and more troub﻿y, nor fresh April dawns. I know not what vent-hole
daylight habitually illumined his soul.

To sum up, in conclusion, that which can be summed up and translated
into positive results in all that we have just pointed out, we will
confine ourselves to the statement that, in the course of nineteen
years, Jean Valjean, the inoffensive tree-pruner of Faverolles, the
formidable convict of Toulon, had become capable, thanks to the manner
in which the galleys had moulded him, of two sorts of evil action:
firstly,﻿d sense of indignities
suffered, the reaction even against the good, the innocent, and the
just, if there are any such. The point of departure, like the point of
arrival, for all his thoughts, was hatred of human law; that hatred
which, if it be not arrested in its development by some providential
incident, becomes, within a given time, the hatred of society, then the
hatred of the human race, then the hatred of creation, and which
manifests itself by a vague, incessant, and brutal desire to do harm to
som﻿forced to pursue. It passes on.

The man disappears, then reappears; he plunges, he rises again to the
surface; he calls, he stretches out his arms; he is not heard. The
vessel, trembling under the hurricane, is wholly absorbed in its own
workings; the passengers and sailors do not even see the drowning man;
his miserable head is but a speck amid the immensity of the waves. He
gives vent to desperate cries from out of the depths. What a spectre is
that retreating sail! He gazes and gazes at it frantically.﻿ver his head; a populace of waves spits upon him; confused
openings half devour him; every time that he sinks, he catches glimpses
of precipices filled with night; frightful and unknown vegetations
seize him, knot about his feet, draw him to them; he is conscious that
he is becoming an abyss, that he forms part of the foam; the waves toss
him from one to another; he drinks in the bitterness; the cowardly
ocean attacks him furiously, to drown him; the enormity plays with his
agony. It seems as though all th﻿r honest, Soult had won no battles; it is true that Napoleon had
no longer any genius. No one is ignorant of the fact that letters sent
to an exile by post very rarely reached him, as the police made it
their religious duty to intercept them. This is no new fact; Descartes
complained of it in his exile. Now David, having, in a Belgian
publication, shown some displeasure at not receiving letters which had
been written to him, it struck the royalist journals as amusing; and
they derided the prescribed man we﻿as
making the rough draft of his privy assembly to consolidate the
monarchy. The leaders of the Right said at grave conjunctures, “We must
write to Bacot.” MM. Canuel, O’Mahoney, and De Chappedelaine were
preparing the sketch, to some extent with Monsieur’s approval, of what
was to become later on “The Conspiracy of the Bord de l‘Eau”—of the
waterside. L‘Épingle Noire was already plotting in his own quarter.
Delaverderie was conferring with Trogoff. M. Decazes, who was liberal
to a degree, reigned. Chateau﻿lf Z. Charles
Nodier wrote _Thérèse Aubert_. Divorce was abolished. Lyceums called
themselves colleges. The collegians, decorated on the collar with a
golden fleur-de-lys, fought each other _apropos_ of the King of Rome.
The counter-police of the château had denounced to her Royal Highness
Madame, the portrait, everywhere exhibited, of M. the Duc d’Orléans,
who made a better appearance in his uniform of a colonel-general of
hussars than M. the Duc de Berri, in his uniform of colonel-general of
dragoons—a s﻿allowed THEATRE OF THE
EMPRESS to be plainly read. People took part for or against Cugnet de
Montarlot. Fabvier was factious; Bavoux was revolutionary. The Liberal,
Pélicier, published an edition of Voltaire, with the following title:
_Works of Voltaire_, of the French Academy. “That will attract
purchasers,” said the ingenious editor. The general opinion was that M.
Charles Loyson would be the genius of the century; envy was beginning
to gnaw at him—a sign of glory; and this verse was composed on him:—

“﻿n was beginning to make
his mark; a note to a poem by Millevoye introduced him to France in
these terms: _a certain Lord Baron_. David d’Angers was trying to work
in marble. The Abbé Caron was speaking, in terms of praise, to a
private gathering of seminarists in the blind alley of Feuillantines,
of an unknown priest, named Félicité-Robert, who, at a latter date,
became Lamennais. A thing which smoked and clattered on the Seine with
the noise of a swimming dog went and came beneath the windows of the
Tuile﻿on de Marsan wished to have M. Delaveau for
prefect of police, on account of his piety. Dupuytren and Récamier
entered into a quarrel in the amphitheatre of the School of Medicine,
and threatened each other with their fists on the subject of the
divinity of Jesus Christ. Cuvier, with one eye on Genesis and the other
on nature, tried to please bigoted reaction by reconciling fossils with
texts and by making mastodons flatter Moses.

M. François de Neufchâteau, the praiseworthy cultivator of the memory
of Pa﻿o blow up the bridge had been
stopped up, was still recognizable on account of its whiteness. Justice
summoned to its bar a man who, on seeing the Comte d’Artois enter Notre
Dame, had said aloud: _“Sapristi! I regret the time when I saw
Bonaparte and Talma enter the Bel Sauvage, arm in arm.”_ A seditious
utterance. Six months in prison. Traitors showed themselves unbuttoned;
men who had gone over to the enemy on the eve of battle made no secret
of their recompense, and strutted immodestly in the light of d﻿es in vegetation,—are useful. It is
of the physiognomy of the years that the physiognomy of the centuries
is composed. In this year of 1817 four young Parisians arranged “a fine
farce.”





CHAPTER II—A DOUBLE QUARTETTE


These Parisians came, one from Toulouse, another from Limoges, the
third from Cahors, and the fourth from Montauban; but they were
students; and when one says student, one says Parisian: to study in
Paris is to be born in Paris.

These young men were insignificant; every one has seen suc﻿the Arthurs, Wellington, had but just won the
battle of Waterloo.

These Oscars bore the names, one of Félix Tholomyès, of Toulouse; the
second, Listolier, of Cahors; the next, Fameuil, of Limoges; the last,
Blachevelle, of Montauban. Naturally, each of them had his mistress.
Blachevelle loved Favourite, so named because she had been in England;
Listolier adored Dahlia, who had taken for her nickname the name of a
flower; Fameuil idolized Zéphine, an abridgment of Joséphine; Tholomyès
had Fantine, called t﻿ old; the old one was
twenty-three. Not to conceal anything, the three first were more
experienced, more heedless, and more emancipated into the tumult of
life than Fantine the Blonde, who was still in her first illusions.

Dahlia, Zéphine, and especially Favourite, could not have said as much.
There had already been more than one episode in their romance, though
hardly begun; and the lover who had borne the name of Adolph in the
first chapter had turned out to be Alphonse in the second, and Gustave
in the﻿an establishment of her own very early in life. Her father
was an old unmarried professor of mathematics, a brutal man and a
braggart, who went out to give lessons in spite of his age. This
professor, when he was a young man, had one day seen a chambermaid’s
gown catch on a fender; he had fallen in love in consequence of this
accident. The result had been Favourite. She met her father from time
to time, and he bowed to her. One morning an old woman with the air of
a devotee, had entered her apartments, and﻿ier, to others perhaps, to idleness. How could she make such
nails work? She who wishes to remain virtuous must not have pity on her
hands. As for Zéphine, she had conquered Fameuil by her roguish and
caressing little way of saying “Yes, sir.”


The young men were comrades; the young girls were friends. Such loves
are always accompanied by such friendships.

Goodness and philosophy are two distinct things; the proof of this is
that, after making all due allowances for these little irregular
households, Fav﻿
depths of social shadow, she bore on her brow the sign of the anonymous
and the unknown. She was born at M. sur M. Of what parents? Who can
say? She had never known father or mother. She was called Fantine. Why
Fantine? She had never borne any other name. At the epoch of her birth
the Directory still existed. She had no family name; she had no family;
no baptismal name; the Church no longer existed. She bore the name
which pleased the first random passer-by, who had encountered her, when
a very small chil﻿ of Azelma.

However, we will remark by the way, everything was not ridiculous and
superficial in that curious epoch to which we are alluding, and which
may be designated as the anarchy of baptismal names. By the side of
this romantic element which we have just indicated there is the social
symptom. It is not rare for the neatherd’s boy nowadays to bear the
name of Arthur, Alfred, or Alphonse, and for the vicomte—if there are
still any vicomtes—to be called Thomas, Pierre, or Jacques. This
displacement, wh﻿st and to honor his signature. On the following month
they were again in need of money. The woman took Cosette’s outfit to
Paris, and pawned it at the pawnbroker’s for sixty francs. As soon as
that sum was spent, the Thénardiers grew accustomed to look on the
little girl merely as a child whom they were caring for out of charity;
and they treated her accordingly. As she had no longer any clothes,
they dressed her in the cast-off petticoats and chemises of the
Thénardier brats; that is to say, in rags. They﻿e expiration of the first six months the mother sent seven francs
for the seventh month, and continued her remittances with tolerable
regularity from month to month. The year was not completed when
Thénardier said: “A fine favor she is doing us, in sooth! What does she
expect us to do with her seven francs?” and he wrote to demand twelve
francs. The mother, whom they had persuaded into the belief that her
child was happy, “and was coming on well,” submitted, and forwarded the
twelve francs.

Certain nature﻿pense each day. If she had not had Cosette, it is
certain that her daughters, idolized as they were, would have received
the whole of it; but the stranger did them the service to divert the
blows to herself. Her daughters received nothing but caresses. Cosette
could not make a motion which did not draw down upon her head a heavy
shower of violent blows and unmerited chastisement. The sweet, feeble
being, who should not have understood anything of this world or of God,
incessantly punished, scolded, ill-use﻿n the meanwhile, Thénardier, having learned, it is impossible to say
by what obscure means, that the child was probably a bastard, and that
the mother could not acknowledge it, exacted fifteen francs a month,
saying that “the creature” was growing and “eating,” and threatening to
send her away. “Let her not bother me,” he exclaimed, “or I’ll fire her
brat right into the middle of her secrets. I must have an increase.”
The mother paid the fifteen francs.

From year to year the child grew, and so did her wre﻿d, “worked for his living and stole”?

Cosette was made to run on errands, to sweep the rooms, the courtyard,
the street, to wash the dishes, to even carry burdens. The Thénardiers
considered themselves all the more authorized to behave in this manner,
since the mother, who was still at M. sur M., had become irregular in
her payments. Some months she was in arrears.

If this mother had returned to Montfermeil at the end of these three
years, she would not have recognized her child. Cosette, so pretty and
r﻿es,
sweeping the street before daylight, with an enormous broom in her tiny
red hands, and a tear in her great eyes.


  Enlarge

Cossette Sweeping  1b4-1-cossette-sweeping


She was called the _Lark_ in the neighborhood. The populace, who are
fond of these figures of speech, had taken a fancy to bestow this name
on this trembling, frightened, and shivering little creature, no bigger
than a bird, who was awake every morning before any one else in the
house or the village, and was always in the street or th﻿ years before. M. sur M. had
changed its aspect. While Fantine had been slowly descending from
wretchedness to wretchedness, her native town had prospered.

About two years previously one of those industrial facts which are the
grand events of small districts had taken place.

This detail is important, and we regard it as useful to develop it at
length; we should almost say, to underline it.

From time immemorial, M. sur M. had had for its special industry the
imitation of English jet and the black glass t﻿together, for slides of soldered sheet-iron.

This very small change had effected a revolution.

This very small change had, in fact, prodigiously reduced the cost of
the raw material, which had rendered it possible in the first place, to
raise the price of manufacture, a benefit to the country; in the second
place, to improve the workmanship, an advantage to the consumer; in the
third place, to sell at a lower price, while trebling the profit, which
was a benefit to the manufacturer.

Thus three results e﻿
own fortune, and the fortune of the whole countryside.

On his arrival at M. sur M. he had only the garments, the appearance,
and the language of a workingman.

It appears that on the very day when he made his obscure entry into the
little town of M. sur M., just at nightfall, on a December evening,
knapsack on back and thorn club in hand, a large fire had broken out in
the town-hall. This man had rushed into the flames and saved, at the
risk of his own life, two children who belonged to the captain of th﻿s
there each year. M. sur M. almost rivalled London and Berlin in this
branch of commerce. Father Madeleine’s profits were such, that at the
end of the second year he was able to erect a large factory, in which
there were two vast workrooms, one for the men, and the other for
women. Any one who was hungry could present himself there, and was sure
of finding employment and bread. Father Madeleine required of the men
good will, of the women pure morals, and of all, probity. He had
separated the work-rooms in﻿circulation warmed everything and penetrated everywhere. Slack seasons
and wretchedness were unknown. There was no pocket so obscure that it
had not a little money in it; no dwelling so lowly that there was not
some little joy within it.

Father Madeleine gave employment to every one. He exacted but one
thing: Be an honest man. Be an honest woman.

As we have said, in the midst of this activity of which he was the
cause and the pivot, Father Madeleine made his fortune; but a singular
thing in a simple man ﻿lived, had but one school, a miserable hovel, which was falling to
ruin: he constructed two, one for girls, the other for boys. He
allotted a salary from his own funds to the two instructors, a salary
twice as large as their meagre official salary, and one day he said to
some one who expressed surprise, “The two prime functionaries of the
state are the nurse and the schoolmaster.” He created at his own
expense an infant school, a thing then almost unknown in France, and a
fund for aiding old and infirm wor﻿olles.
Another fact. This Valjean’s Christian name was Jean, and his mother’s
surname was Mathieu. What more natural to suppose than that, on
emerging from the galleys, he should have taken his mother’s name for
the purpose of concealing himself, and have called himself Jean
Mathieu? He goes to Auvergne. The local pronunciation turns _Jean_ into
_Chan_—he is called Chan Mathieu. Our man offers no opposition, and
behold him transformed into Champmathieu. You follow me, do you not?
Inquiries were made at Fav﻿nildieu, and are
sentenced for life. They are taken from the galleys and confronted with
the pretended Champmathieu. They do not hesitate; he is Jean Valjean
for them as well as for Brevet. The same age,—he is fifty-four,—the
same height, the same air, the same man; in short, it is he. It was
precisely at this moment that I forwarded my denunciation to the
Prefecture in Paris. I was told that I had lost my reason, and that
Jean Valjean is at Arras, in the power of the authorities. You can
imagine whether t﻿

“O! Sure!”


He stood there thoughtfully for a moment, mechanically taking pinches
of powdered wood for blotting ink from the wooden bowl which stood on
the table, and he added:—

“And even now that I have seen the real Jean Valjean, I do not see how
I could have thought otherwise. I beg your pardon, Mr. Mayor.”


Javert, as he addressed these grave and supplicating words to the man,
who six weeks before had humiliated him in the presence of the whole
station-house, and bade him “leave the room,”—Javert,﻿rrectional police; it is a matter for the Court of Assizes. It is no
longer a matter of a few days in prison; it is the galleys for life.
And then, there is the affair with the little Savoyard, who will
return, I hope. The deuce! there is plenty to dispute in the matter, is
there not? Yes, for any one but Jean Valjean. But Jean Valjean is a sly
dog. That is the way I recognized him. Any other man would have felt
that things were getting hot for him; he would struggle, he would cry
out—the kettle sings befo﻿urned to his desk again, and taken up his docket, and
was turning over the leaves tranquilly, reading and writing by turns,
like a busy man. He turned to Javert:—

“That will do, Javert. In truth, all these details interest me but
little. We are wasting our time, and we have pressing business on hand.
Javert, you will betake yourself at once to the house of the woman
Buseaupied, who sells herbs at the corner of the Rue Saint-Saulve. You
will tell her that she must enter her complaint against carter Pierre
﻿ will prepare documents. But I am giving you a
great deal of work. Are you not to be absent? Did you not tell me that
you were going to Arras on that matter in a week or ten days?”


“Sooner than that, Mr. Mayor.”


“On what day, then?”


“Why, I thought that I had said to Monsieur le Maire that the case was
to be tried to-morrow, and that I am to set out by diligence to-night.”


M. Madeleine made an imperceptible movement.

“And how long will the case last?”


“One day, at the most. The judgment will be ﻿r, and I esteem you. You exaggerate your
fault. Moreover, this is an offence which concerns me. Javert, you
deserve promotion instead of degradation. I wish you to retain your
post.”


Javert gazed at M. Madeleine with his candid eyes, in whose depths his
not very enlightened but pure and rigid conscience seemed visible, and
said in a tranquil voice:—

“Mr. Mayor, I cannot grant you that.”


“I repeat,” replied M. Madeleine, “that the matter concerns me.”


But Javert, heeding his own thought only, continu﻿my subordinates had done what I have done, I
should have declared him unworthy of the service, and have expelled
him. Well? Stop, Mr. Mayor; one word more. I have often been severe in
the course of my life towards others. That is just. I have done well.
Now, if I were not severe towards myself, all the justice that I have
done would become injustice. Ought I to spare myself more than others?
No! What! I should be good for nothing but to chastise others, and not
myself! Why, I should be a blackguard! Those ﻿very easy to be kind; the difficulty lies in being just. Come! if
you had been what I thought you, I should not have been kind to you,
not I! You would have seen! Mr. Mayor, I must treat myself as I would
treat any other man. When I have subdued malefactors, when I have
proceeded with vigor against rascals, I have often said to myself, ‘If
you flinch, if I ever catch you in fault, you may rest at your ease!’ I
have flinched, I have caught myself in a fault. So much the worse!
Come, discharged, cashiered, e﻿r his
hand to a police spy.”


He added between his teeth:—

“A police spy, yes; from the moment when I have misused the police. I
am no more than a police spy.”


Then he bowed profoundly, and directed his steps towards the door.

There he wheeled round, and with eyes still downcast:—

“Mr. Mayor,” he said, “I shall continue to serve until I am
superseded.”


He withdrew. M. Madeleine remained thoughtfully listening to the firm,
sure step, which died away on the pavement of the corridor.




BOOK SEVENTH—﻿ to
see Fantine according to his wont.

Before entering Fantine’s room, he had Sister Simplice summoned.

The two nuns who performed the services of nurse in the infirmary,
Lazariste ladies, like all sisters of charity, bore the names of Sister
Perpétue and Sister Simplice.

Sister Perpétue was an ordinary villager, a sister of charity in a
coarse style, who had entered the service of God as one enters any
other service. She was a nun as other women are cooks. This type is not
so very rare. The monastic or﻿ Perpétue
was a robust nun from Marines near Pontoise, who chattered her patois,
droned, grumbled, sugared the potion according to the bigotry or the
hypocrisy of the invalid, treated her patients abruptly, roughly, was
crabbed with the dying, almost flung God in their faces, stoned their
death agony with prayers mumbled in a rage; was bold, honest, and
ruddy.

Sister Simplice was white, with a waxen pallor. Beside Sister Perpétue,
she was the taper beside the candle. Vincent de Paul has divinely
traced th﻿ough she would never grow old. No one
could have told Sister Simplice’s age. She was a person—we dare not say
a woman—who was gentle, austere, well-bred, cold, and who had never
lied. She was so gentle that she appeared fragile; but she was more
solid than granite. She touched the unhappy with fingers that were
charmingly pure and fine. There was, so to speak, silence in her
speech; she said just what was necessary, and she possessed a tone of
voice which would have equally edified a confessional or enchan﻿oundly subtle, gradually bending beneath the weight of a
terrible likeness. This man, as the reader already knows, was a
vagabond who had been found in a field carrying a branch laden with
ripe apples, broken in the orchard of a neighbor, called the Pierron
orchard. Who was this man? an examination had been made; witnesses had
been heard, and they were unanimous; light had abounded throughout the
entire debate; the accusation said: “We have in our grasp not only a
marauder, a stealer of fruit; we have here﻿have been judicially established. He has just committed a fresh
theft; it is a case of a second offence; condemn him for the fresh
deed; later on he will be judged for the old crime.” In the face of
this accusation, in the face of the unanimity of the witnesses, the
accused appeared to be astonished more than anything else; he made
signs and gestures which were meant to convey No, or else he stared at
the ceiling: he spoke with difficulty, replied with embarrassment, but
his whole person, from head to foot﻿eys, a possible death penalty, in case his identity were
established, and the affair of Little Gervais were to end thereafter in
condemnation. Who was this man? what was the nature of his apathy? was
it imbecility or craft? Did he understand too well, or did he not
understand at all? these were questions which divided the crowd, and
seemed to divide the jury; there was something both terrible and
puzzling in this case: the drama was not only melancholy; it was also
obscure.

The counsel for the defence had﻿; the king, _the monarch_; Monseigneur the Bishop, _a
sainted pontiff_; the district-attorney, _the eloquent interpreter of
public prosecution_; the arguments, _the accents which we have just
listened to_; the age of Louis XIV., _the grand age_; a theatre, _the
temple of Melpomene_; the reigning family, _the august blood of our
kings_; a concert, _a musical solemnity_; the General Commandant of the
province, _the illustrious warrior, who, etc._; the pupils in the
seminary, _these tender levities_; errors i﻿, in his character of counsel, persisted in calling
Champmathieu, had not been seen scaling that wall nor breaking that
branch by any one. He had been taken with that branch (which the lawyer
preferred to call a _bough_) in his possession; but he said that he had
found it broken off and lying on the ground, and had picked it up.
Where was there any proof to the contrary? No doubt that branch had
been broken off and concealed after the scaling of the wall, then
thrown away by the alarmed marauder; there was﻿
hesitation, as that convict, Jean Valjean; to these signs, to this
testimony, the counsel could oppose nothing but the denial of his
client, the denial of an interested party; but supposing that he was
the convict Jean Valjean, did that prove that he was the thief of the
apples? that was a presumption at the most, not a proof. The prisoner,
it was true, and his counsel, “in good faith,” was obliged to admit it,
had adopted “a bad system of defence.” He obstinately denied
everything, the theft and his char﻿him,
etc. He defended himself badly; was that a reason for condemning him?
As for the affair with Little Gervais, the counsel need not discuss it;
it did not enter into the case. The lawyer wound up by beseeching the
jury and the court, if the identity of Jean Valjean appeared to them to
be evident, to apply to him the police penalties which are provided for
a criminal who has broken his ban, and not the frightful chastisement
which descends upon the convict guilty of a second offence.

The district-attorn﻿utonomasia which went back to the sources and causes of crime, the
district-attorney thundered against the immorality of the romantic
school, then dawning under the name of _the Satanic school_, which had
been bestowed upon it by the critics of the _Quotidienne_ and the
_Oriflamme_; he attributed, not without some probability, to the
influence of this perverse literature the crime of Champmathieu, or
rather, to speak more correctly, of Jean Valjean. Having exhausted
these considerations, he passed on to Je﻿d it is such a man, etc., etc., etc., vagabond, beggar, without means
of existence, etc., etc., inured by his past life to culpable deeds,
and but little reformed by his sojourn in the galleys, as was proved by
the crime committed against Little Gervais, etc., etc.; it is such a
man, caught upon the highway in the very act of theft, a few paces from
a wall that had been scaled, still holding in his hand the object
stolen, who denies the crime, the theft, the climbing the wall; denies
everything; denies eve﻿ent in which
some admiration was assuredly blended. He was evidently surprised that
a man could talk like that. From time to time, at those “energetic”
moments of the prosecutor’s speech, when eloquence which cannot contain
itself overflows in a flood of withering epithets and envelops the
accused like a storm, he moved his head slowly from right to left and
from left to right in the sort of mute and melancholy protest with
which he had contented himself since the beginning of the argument. Two
or three ti﻿will remember, it was penal servitude for
life.

The counsel for the defence rose, began by complimenting Monsieur
l’Avocat-General on his “admirable speech,” then replied as best he
could; but he weakened; the ground was evidently slipping away from
under his feet.




CHAPTER X—THE SYSTEM OF DENIALS


The moment for closing the debate had arrived. The President had the
accused stand up, and addressed to him the customary question, “Have
you anything to add to your defence?”


The man did not appear to un﻿on. It
seemed, from the manner in which the words escaped from his
mouth,—incoherent, impetuous, pell-mell, tumbling over each other,—as
though they were all pressing forward to issue forth at once. He said:—

“This is what I have to say. That I have been a wheelwright in Paris,
and that it was with Monsieur Baloup. It is a hard trade. In the
wheelwright’s trade one works always in the open air, in courtyards,
under sheds when the masters are good, never in closed workshops,
because space is required, you ﻿rty sous a day.
They paid me as little as possible. The masters took advantage of my
age—and then I had my daughter, who was a laundress at the river. She
earned a little also. It sufficed for us two. She had trouble, also;
all day long up to her waist in a tub, in rain, in snow. When the wind
cuts your face, when it freezes, it is all the same; you must still
wash. There are people who have not much linen, and wait until late; if
you do not wash, you lose your custom. The planks are badly joined, and
wate﻿al, as of the material, world depend, had complained. Smoking blood,
over-filled cemeteries, mothers in tears,—these are formidable
pleaders. When the earth is suffering from too heavy a burden, there
are mysterious groanings of the shades, to which the abyss lends an
ear.

Napoleon had been denounced in the infinite and his fall had been
decided on.

He embarrassed God.

Waterloo is not a battle; it is a change of front on the part of the
Universe.




CHAPTER X—THE PLATEAU OF MONT-SAINT-JEAN


The batter﻿courage.

Wathier’s column alone had suffered in the disaster; Delort’s column,
which Ney had deflected to the left, as though he had a presentiment of
an ambush, had arrived whole.

The cuirassiers hurled themselves on the English squares.

At full speed, with bridles loose, swords in their teeth, pistols in
fist,—such was the attack.

There are moments in battles in which the soul hardens the man until
the soldier is changed into a statue, and when all this flesh turns
into granite. The English battalion﻿orses reared, strode across the ranks,
leaped over the bayonets and fell, gigantic, in the midst of these four
living wells. The cannon-balls ploughed furrows in these cuirassiers;
the cuirassiers made breaches in the squares. Files of men disappeared,
ground to dust under the horses. The bayonets plunged into the bellies
of these centaurs; hence a hideousness of wounds which has probably
never been seen anywhere else. The squares, wasted by this mad cavalry,
closed up their ranks without flinching. Inexha﻿ipe-player in the centre
dropped his melancholy eyes, filled with the reflections of the forests
and the lakes, in profound inattention, while men were being
exterminated around him, and seated on a drum, with his pibroch under
his arm, played the Highland airs. These Scotchmen died thinking of Ben
Lothian, as did the Greeks recalling Argos. The sword of a cuirassier,
which hewed down the bagpipes and the arm which bore it, put an end to
the song by killing the singer.

The cuirassiers, relatively few in n﻿ssailed. The English cavalry was at their back. Before them
two squares, behind them Somerset; Somerset meant fourteen hundred
dragoons of the guard. On the right, Somerset had Dornberg with the
German light-horse, and on his left, Trip with the Belgian carabineers;
the cuirassiers attacked on the flank and in front, before and in the
rear, by infantry and cavalry, had to face all sides. What mattered it
to them? They were a whirlwind. Their valor was something
indescribable.

In addition to this, they had﻿ guards numbered only eight
hundred. Fuller, their lieutenant-colonel, fell dead. Ney rushed up
with the lancers and Lefebvre-Desnouettes’s light-horse. The plateau of
Mont-Saint-Jean was captured, recaptured, captured again. The
cuirassiers quitted the cavalry to return to the infantry; or, to put
it more exactly, the whole of that formidable rout collared each other
without releasing the other. The squares still held firm.

There were a dozen assaults. Ney had four horses killed under him. Half
the cuira﻿f thirteen, took or
spiked sixty pieces of ordnance, and captured from the English
regiments six flags, which three cuirassiers and three chasseurs of the
Guard bore to the Emperor, in front of the farm of La Belle Alliance.

Wellington’s situation had grown worse. This strange battle was like a
duel between two raging, wounded men, each of whom, still fighting and
still resisting, is expending all his blood.

Which of the two will be the first to fall?

The conflict on the plateau continued.

What had bec﻿ton felt that he was yielding. The crisis was at hand.

The cuirassiers had not succeeded, since the centre was not broken
through. As every one was in possession of the plateau, no one held it,
and in fact it remained, to a great extent, with the English.
Wellington held the village and the culminating plain; Ney had only the
crest and the slope. They seemed rooted in that fatal soil on both
sides.

But the weakening of the English seemed irremediable. The bleeding of
that army was horrible. Kempt, on the﻿infantry to nothing. A few men
clustered round a flag marked the post of a regiment; such and such a
battalion was commanded only by a captain or a lieutenant; Alten’s
division, already so roughly handled at La Haie-Sainte, was almost
destroyed; the intrepid Belgians of Van Kluze’s brigade strewed the
rye-fields all along the Nivelles road; hardly anything was left of
those Dutch grenadiers, who, intermingled with Spaniards in our ranks
in 1811, fought against Wellington; and who, in 1815, rallied to the
E﻿he second regiment of foot-guards
had lost five lieutenant-colonels, four captains, and three ensigns;
the first battalion of the 30th infantry had lost 24 officers and 1,200
soldiers; the 79th Highlanders had lost 24 officers wounded, 18
officers killed, 450 soldiers killed. The Hanoverian hussars of
Cumberland, a whole regiment, with Colonel Hacke at its head, who was
destined to be tried later on and cashiered, had turned bridle in the
presence of the fray, and had fled to the forest of Soignes, sowing
﻿t it attacked the Prince de Condé at
Mechlin, and Louis XVIII. at Ghent. With the exception of the feeble
reserve echelonned behind the ambulance established at the farm of
Mont-Saint-Jean, and of Vivian’s and Vandeleur’s brigades, which
flanked the left wing, Wellington had no cavalry left. A number of
batteries lay unhorsed. These facts are attested by Siborne; and
Pringle, exaggerating the disaster, goes so far as to say that the
Anglo-Dutch army was reduced to thirty-four thousand men. The Iron Duke
re﻿D GUIDE TO BÜLOW


The painful surprise of Napoleon is well known. Grouchy hoped for,
Blücher arriving. Death instead of life.

Fate has these turns; the throne of the world was expected; it was
Saint Helena that was seen.

If the little shepherd who served as guide to Bülow, Blücher’s
lieutenant, had advised him to debouch from the forest above
Frischemont, instead of below Plancenoit, the form of the nineteenth
century might, perhaps, have been different. Napoleon would have won
the battle of Waterloo. B﻿sions stuck fast in the mire. The ruts were up to the hubs of the
cannons. Moreover, he had been obliged to pass the Dyle on the narrow
bridge of Wavre; the street leading to the bridge had been fired by the
French, so the caissons and ammunition-wagons could not pass between
two rows of burning houses, and had been obliged to wait until the
conflagration was extinguished. It was midday before Bülow’s vanguard
had been able to reach Chapelle-Saint-Lambert.

Had the action been begun two hours earlier, it w﻿ she
knocked. The door opened. The Thénardier appeared with a candle in her
hand.

“Ah! so it’s you, you little wretch! good mercy, but you’ve taken your
time! The hussy has been amusing herself!”


“Madame,” said Cosette, trembling all over, “here’s a gentleman who
wants a lodging.”


The Thénardier speedily replaced her gruff air by her amiable grimace,
a change of aspect common to tavern-keepers, and eagerly sought the
newcomer with her eyes.

“This is the gentleman?” said she.

“Yes, Madame,” replied t﻿tossing
her head, wrinkling her nose, and screwing up her eyes, she consulted
her husband, who was still drinking with the carters. The husband
replied by that imperceptible movement of the forefinger, which, backed
up by an inflation of the lips, signifies in such cases: A regular
beggar. Thereupon, the Thénardier exclaimed:—

“Ah! see here, my good man; I am very sorry, but I have no room left.”


“Put me where you like,” said the man; “in the attic, in the stable. I
will pay as though I occupied a room.﻿a
bottle of wine and a glass. The merchant who had demanded the bucket of
water took it to his horse himself. Cosette resumed her place under the
kitchen table, and her knitting.

The man, who had barely moistened his lips in the wine which he had
poured out for himself, observed the child with peculiar attention.

Cosette was ugly. If she had been happy, she might have been pretty. We
have already given a sketch of that sombre little figure. Cosette was
thin and pale; she was nearly eight years old, but s﻿ knees one against the other. Her entire clothing was but a
rag which would have inspired pity in summer, and which inspired horror
in winter. All she had on was hole-ridden linen, not a scrap of
woollen. Her skin was visible here and there and everywhere black and
blue spots could be descried, which marked the places where the
Thénardier woman had touched her. Her naked legs were thin and red. The
hollows in her neck were enough to make one weep. This child’s whole
person, her mien, her attitude, the soun﻿ssible
variation except an increase. In the depths of her eyes there was an
astonished nook where terror lurked.

Her fear was such, that on her arrival, wet as she was, Cosette did not
dare to approach the fire and dry herself, but sat silently down to her
work again.

The expression in the glance of that child of eight years was
habitually so gloomy, and at times so tragic, that it seemed at certain
moments as though she were on the verge of becoming an idiot or a
demon.

As we have stated, she had never﻿ the baker’s shop was shut.”


“You should have knocked.”


“I did knock, Madame.”


“Well?”


“He did not open the door.”


“I’ll find out to-morrow whether that is true,” said the Thénardier;
“and if you are telling me a lie, I’ll lead you a pretty dance. In the
meantime, give me back my fifteen-sou piece.”


Cosette plunged her hand into the pocket of her apron, and turned
green. The fifteen-sou piece was not there.

“Ah, come now,” said Madame Thénardier, “did you hear me?”


Cosette turned her pocket ﻿
The Thénardier took down the whip.

In the meantime, the man in the yellow coat had been fumbling in the
fob of his waistcoat, without any one having noticed his movements.
Besides, the other travellers were drinking or playing cards, and were
not paying attention to anything.

Cosette contracted herself into a ball, with anguish, within the angle
of the chimney, endeavoring to gather up and conceal her poor half-nude
limbs. The Thénardier raised her arm.

“Pardon me, Madame,” said the man, “but just now ﻿ glance at the child, accompanied with the
remark, “Don’t let this ever happen again!”


Cosette returned to what the Thénardier called “her kennel,” and her
large eyes, which were riveted on the traveller, began to take on an
expression such as they had never worn before. Thus far it was only an
innocent amazement, but a sort of stupefied confidence was mingled with
it.

“By the way, would you like some supper?” the Thénardier inquired of
the traveller.

He made no reply. He appeared to be absorbed in tho﻿ack braids hanging down her back, both vivacious,
neat, plump, rosy, and healthy, and a delight to the eye. They were
warmly clad, but with so much maternal art that the thickness of the
stuffs did not detract from the coquetry of arrangement. There was a
hint of winter, though the springtime was not wholly effaced. Light
emanated from these two little beings. Besides this, they were on the
throne. In their toilettes, in their gayety, in the noise which they
made, there was sovereignty. When they entered, ﻿e to time Cosette raised her eyes from her knitting,
and watched their play with a melancholy air.

Éponine and Azelma did not look at Cosette. She was the same as a dog
to them. These three little girls did not yet reckon up four and twenty
years between them, but they already represented the whole society of
man; envy on the one side, disdain on the other.

The doll of the Thénardier sisters was very much faded, very old, and
much broken; but it seemed nonetheless admirable to Cosette, who had
never had ﻿ah, Madame,” he said, with an almost timid air, “let her play!”


Such a wish expressed by a traveller who had eaten a slice of mutton
and had drunk a couple of bottles of wine with his supper, and who had
not the air of being frightfully poor, would have been equivalent to an
order. But that a man with such a hat should permit himself such a
desire, and that a man with such a coat should permit himself to have a
will, was something which Madame Thénardier did not intend to tolerate.
She retorted with acri﻿ has at least three or four good days’ work on them still, the lazy
creature!”


“And how much will that pair of stockings be worth when she has
finished them?”


The Thénardier cast a glance of disdain on him.

“Thirty sous at least.”


“Will you sell them for five francs?” went on the man.

“Good heavens!” exclaimed a carter who was listening, with a loud
laugh; “five francs! the deuce, I should think so! five balls!”


Thénardier thought it time to strike in.

“Yes, sir; if such is your fancy, you will ﻿tened up.

“But it’s true!” he cried, examining it. “A real hind wheel! and not
counterfeit!”


Thénardier approached and silently put the coin in his pocket.

The Thénardier had no reply to make. She bit her lips, and her face
assumed an expression of hatred.

In the meantime, Cosette was trembling. She ventured to ask:—

“Is it true, Madame? May I play?”


“Play!” said the Thénardier, in a terrible voice.

“Thanks, Madame,” said Cosette.

And while her mouth thanked the Thénardier, her whole little soul
﻿the spy under cover of prayer.

“The suspected individual” did indeed approach Javert thus disguised,
and bestow alms on him. At that moment Javert raised his head, and the
shock which Jean Valjean received on recognizing Javert was equal to
the one received by Javert when he thought he recognized Jean Valjean.

However, the darkness might have misled him; Jean Valjean’s death was
official; Javert cherished very grave doubts; and when in doubt,
Javert, the man of scruples, never laid a finger on any one’s ﻿spy by keeping silent.

On the following day Jean Valjean decamped; but the noise made by the
fall of the five-franc piece was noticed by the old woman, who, hearing
the rattling of coin, suspected that he might be intending to leave,
and made haste to warn Javert. At night, when Jean Valjean came out,
Javert was waiting for him behind the trees of the boulevard with two
men.

Javert had demanded assistance at the Prefecture, but he had not
mentioned the name of the individual whom he hoped to seize; that ﻿nvict; and lastly, because Javert, being an
artist, had a taste for the unforeseen. He hated those well-heralded
successes which are talked of long in advance and have had the bloom
brushed off. He preferred to elaborate his masterpieces in the dark and
to unveil them suddenly at the last.

Javert had followed Jean Valjean from tree to tree, then from corner to
corner of the street, and had not lost sight of him for a single
instant; even at the moments when Jean Valjean believed himself to be
the most sec﻿nt dismissal.
The reader can imagine the effect which this brief paragraph,
reproduced by twenty newspapers, would have caused in Paris:
“Yesterday, an aged grandfather, with white hair, a respectable and
well-to-do gentleman, who was walking with his grandchild, aged eight,
was arrested and conducted to the agency of the Prefecture as an
escaped convict!”


Let us repeat in addition that Javert had scruples of his own;
injunctions of his conscience were added to the injunctions of the
prefect. He was real﻿ The impossibility of approaching too close, his
costume of an _émigré_ preceptor, the declaration of Thénardier which
made a grandfather of him, and, finally, the belief in his death in
prison, added still further to the uncertainty which gathered thick in
Javert’s mind.

For an instant it occurred to him to make an abrupt demand for his
papers; but if the man was not Jean Valjean, and if this man was not a
good, honest old fellow living on his income, he was probably some
merry blade deeply and cunningly﻿ry sure that he would not escape.

Thus he proceeded in a tolerably perplexed state of mind, putting to
himself a hundred questions about this enigmatical personage.

It was only quite late in the Rue de Pontoise, that, thanks to the
brilliant light thrown from a dram-shop, he decidedly recognized Jean
Valjean.

There are in this world two beings who give a profound start,—the
mother who recovers her child and the tiger who recovers his prey.
Javert gave that profound start.

As soon as he had positively r﻿is nose to the ground to make sure that he is on the right
scent. Javert, with his powerful rectitude of instinct, went straight
to the bridge of Austerlitz. A word with the toll-keeper furnished him
with the information which he required: “Have you seen a man with a
little girl?” “I made him pay two sous,” replied the toll-keeper.
Javert reached the bridge in season to see Jean Valjean traverse the
small illuminated spot on the other side of the water, leading Cosette
by the hand. He saw him enter the Rue﻿e best of a wild
boar, one must employ the science of venery and plenty of dogs. These
combinations having been effected, feeling that Jean Valjean was caught
between the blind alley Genrot on the right, his agent on the left, and
himself, Javert, in the rear, he took a pinch of snuff.

Then he began the game. He experienced one ecstatic and infernal
moment; he allowed his man to go on ahead, knowing that he had him
safe, but desirous of postponing the moment of arrest as long as
possible, happy at the tho﻿ the very idea of resistance was impossible,
however vigorous, energetic, and desperate Jean Valjean might be.


  Enlarge

Javert on the Hunt  2b5-10-javert-on-the-hunt


Javert advanced slowly, sounding, searching on his way all the nooks of
the street like so many pockets of thieves.

When he reached the centre of the web he found the fly no longer there.

His exasperation can be imagined.

He interrogated his sentinel of the Rues Droit-Mur and Petit-Picpus;
that agent, who had remained imperturbably at﻿e war with Russia,
that Alexander committed blunders in the war in India, that Cæsar made
mistakes in the war in Africa, that Cyrus was at fault in the war in
Scythia, and that Javert blundered in this campaign against Jean
Valjean. He was wrong, perhaps, in hesitating in his recognition of the
exconvict. The first glance should have sufficed him. He was wrong in
not arresting him purely and simply in the old building; he was wrong
in not arresting him when he positively recognized him in the Rue de
Pontoi﻿he was wrong in that after he had
picked up the scent again on the bridge of Austerlitz, he played that
formidable and puerile game of keeping such a man at the end of a
thread. He thought himself stronger than he was, and believed that he
could play at the game of the mouse and the lion. At the same time, he
reckoned himself as too weak, when he judged it necessary to obtain
reinforcement. Fatal precaution, waste of precious time! Javert
committed all these blunders, and nonetheless was one of the clevere﻿normous: it is Attila hesitating between
Marcian on the east and Valentinian on the west; it is Hannibal
tarrying at Capua; it is Danton falling asleep at Arcis-sur-Aube.

However that may be, even at the moment when he saw that Jean Valjean
had escaped him, Javert did not lose his head. Sure that the convict
who had broken his ban could not be far off, he established sentinels,
he organized traps and ambuscades, and beat the quarter all that night.
The first thing he saw was the disorder in the street lan﻿ardens and these waste stretches as though he had been
hunting for a needle.

At daybreak he left two intelligent men on the outlook, and returned to
the Prefecture of Police, as much ashamed as a police spy who had been
captured by a robber might have been.




BOOK SIXTH—LE PETIT-PICPUS




CHAPTER I—NUMBER 62 RUE PETIT-PICPUS


Nothing, half a century ago, more resembled every other carriage gate
than the carriage gate of Number 62 Rue Petit-Picpus. This entrance,
which usually stood ajar in the most in﻿a second time.

“It is the knell, Monsieur Madeleine. The bell will continue to strike
once a minute for twenty-four hours, until the body is taken from the
church.—You see, they play. At recreation hours it suffices to have a
ball roll aside, to send them all hither, in spite of prohibitions, to
hunt and rummage for it all about here. Those cherubs are devils.”


“Who?” asked Jean Valjean.

“The little girls. You would be very quickly discovered. They would
shriek: ‘Oh! a man!’ There is no danger to-day. ﻿s though I were a wild
beast.”


Jean Valjean fell into more and more profound thought.—“This convent
would be our salvation,” he murmured.

Then he raised his voice:—

“Yes, the difficulty is to remain here.”


“No,” said Fauchelevent, “the difficulty is to get out.”


Jean Valjean felt the blood rush back to his heart.

“To get out!”


“Yes, Monsieur Madeleine. In order to return here it is first necessary
to get out.”


And after waiting until another stroke of the knell had sounded,
Fauchelevent went o﻿k for the
sake of questioning you, but how did you get in?”


Jean Valjean turned pale; the very thought of descending again into
that terrible street made him shudder. You make your way out of a
forest filled with tigers, and once out of it, imagine a friendly
counsel that shall advise you to return thither! Jean Valjean pictured
to himself the whole police force still engaged in swarming in that
quarter, agents on the watch, sentinels everywhere, frightful fists
extended towards his collar, Javert at the﻿e dead-doctor is to come here and view a
corpse. All that is the ceremony of dying. These good ladies are not at
all fond of that visit. A doctor is a man who does not believe in
anything. He lifts the veil. Sometimes he lifts something else too. How
quickly they have had the doctor summoned this time! What is the
matter? Your little one is still asleep. What is her name?”


“Cosette.”


“She is your daughter? You are her grandfather, that is?”


“Yes.”


“It will be easy enough for her to get out of here.﻿ of mine, and that she is to keep her for me until to-morrow. Then
the little one will re-enter with you; for I will contrive to have you
re-enter. It must be done. But how will you manage to get out?”


Jean Valjean shook his head.

“No one must see me, the whole point lies there, Father Fauchelevent.
Find some means of getting me out in a basket, under cover, like
Cosette.”


Fauchelevent scratched the lobe of his ear with the middle finger of
his left hand, a sign of serious embarrassment.

A third peal﻿
street, and into which no man may enter save the doctor of the dead. I
don’t count the undertaker’s men and myself as men. It is in that hall
that I nail up the coffin. The undertaker’s men come and get it, and
whip up, coachman! that’s the way one goes to heaven. They fetch a box
with nothing in it, they take it away again with something in it.
That’s what a burial is like. _De profundis_.”


A horizontal ray of sunshine lightly touched the face of the sleeping
Cosette, who lay with her mouth vaguely ope﻿t is convenient. I have a friend
there, Father Mestienne, the grave-digger. The nuns here possess one
privilege, it is to be taken to that cemetery at nightfall. There is a
special permission from the Prefecture on their behalf. But how many
events have happened since yesterday! Mother Crucifixion is dead, and
Father Madeleine—”


“Is buried,” said Jean Valjean, smiling sadly.

Fauchelevent caught the word.

“Goodness! if you were here for good, it would be a real burial.”


A fourth peal burst out. Fauche﻿delong glance by the way on his
melon patch.

Less than ten minutes later, Father Fauchelevent, whose bell put the
nuns in his road to flight, tapped gently at a door, and a gentle voice
replied: _“Forever! Forever!” _ that is to say: _“Enter.” _

The door was the one leading to the parlor reserved for seeing the
gardener on business. This parlor adjoined the chapter hall. The
prioress, seated on the only chair in the parlor, was waiting for
Fauchelevent.




CHAPTER II—FAUCHELEVENT IN THE PRESENCE OF A DI﻿ and said:—

“Ah! it is you, Father Fauvent.”


This abbreviation had been adopted in the convent.

Fauchelevent bowed again.

“Father Fauvent, I have sent for you.”


“Here I am, reverend Mother.”


“I have something to say to you.”


“And so have I,” said Fauchelevent with a boldness which caused him
inward terror, “I have something to say to the very reverend Mother.”


The prioress stared at him.

“Ah! you have a communication to make to me.”


“A request.”


“Very well, speak.”


Goodman Fauchelevent,﻿of attention and
sharpness he had succeeded in clothing all those phantoms with flesh,
and those corpses were alive for him. He was like a deaf man whose
sight grows keener, and like a blind man whose hearing becomes more
acute. He had applied himself to riddling out the significance of the
different peals, and he had succeeded, so that this taciturn and
enigmatical cloister possessed no secrets for him; the sphinx babbled
all her secrets in his ear. Fauchelevent knew all and concealed all;
that constitute﻿was acquainted with the
peculiarities of their sepulture; in this way, he possessed a double
light on the subject of these nuns, one as to their life, the other as
to their death. But he did not abuse his knowledge. The congregation
thought a great deal of him. Old, lame, blind to everything, probably a
little deaf into the bargain,—what qualities! They would have found it
difficult to replace him.

The goodman, with the assurance of a person who feels that he is
appreciated, entered into a rather diffuse ﻿ment on the part of the prioress, but one expressive of
reassurance),—“that, if he might be permitted, this brother would come
and live with him and help him, that he was an excellent gardener, that
the community would receive from him good service, better than his own;
that, otherwise, if his brother were not admitted, as he, the elder,
felt that his health was broken and that he was insufficient for the
work, he should be obliged, greatly to his regret, to go away; and that
his brother had a little daugh﻿ter, and where the vocal mothers
were probably assembled. Fauchelevent was left alone.




CHAPTER III—MOTHER INNOCENTE


About a quarter of an hour elapsed. The prioress returned and seated
herself once more on her chair.

The two interlocutors seemed preoccupied. We will present a
stenographic report of the dialogue which then ensued, to the best of
our ability.

“Father Fauvent!”


“Reverend Mother!”


“Do you know the chapel?”


“I have a little cage there, where I hear the mass and the offices.”


“An﻿e fathers, in despair, attacked the exempts. In that
case, the parliament intervened and had some one hung. Who? The
exempts? No, the fathers.




CHAPTER VII—THE GAMIN SHOULD HAVE HIS PLACE IN THE CLASSIFICATIONS OF
INDIA


The body of street Arabs in Paris almost constitutes a caste. One might
almost say: Not every one who wishes to belong to it can do so.

This word _gamin_ was printed for the first time, and reached popular
speech through the literary tongue, in 1834. It is in a little work
entitled _C﻿nd had
“prigged” some lead from them; a third, because he had seen a diligence
tip over; still another, because he “knew” a soldier who came near
putting out the eye of a citizen.

This explains that famous exclamation of a Parisian gamin, a profound
epiphonema, which the vulgar herd laughs at without comprehending,—
_Dieu de Dieu! What ill-luck I do have! to think that I have never yet
seen anybody tumble from a fifth-story window! _ (_I have_ pronounced
_I’ave_ and _fifth_ pronounced _fift’_.)

Surely, t﻿


A certain audacity on matters of religion sets off the gamin. To be
strong-minded is an important item.

To be present at executions constitutes a duty. He shows himself at the
guillotine, and he laughs. He calls it by all sorts of pet names: The
End of the Soup, The Growler, The Mother in the Blue (the sky), The
Last Mouthful, etc., etc. In order not to lose anything of the affair,
he scales the walls, he hoists himself to balconies, he ascends trees,
he suspends himself to gratings, he clings fast to ﻿apavoine is. “Politicians” are confused with assassins in
the same legend. They have a tradition as to everybody’s last garment.
It is known that Tolleron had a fireman’s cap, Avril an otter cap,
Losvel a round hat, that old Delaporte was bald and bareheaded, that
Castaing was all ruddy and very handsome, that Bories had a romantic
small beard, that Jean Martin kept on his suspenders, that Lecouffé and
his mother quarrelled. “Don’t reproach each other for your basket,”
shouted a gamin to them. Another, in ﻿, “to the very bone.”


The fist is no mediocre element of respect. One of the things that the
gamin is fondest of saying is: “I am fine and strong, come now!” To be
left-handed renders you very enviable. A squint is highly esteemed.




CHAPTER VIII—IN WHICH THE READER WILL FIND A CHARMING SAYING OF THE
LAST KING


In summer, he metamorphoses himself into a frog; and in the evening,
when night is falling, in front of the bridges of Austerlitz and Jena,
from the tops of coal wagons, and the washerwomen’s b﻿Here it is: “Ohé, Titi, ohééé! Here comes the bobby,
here comes the p’lice, pick up your duds and be off, through the sewer
with you!”


Sometimes this gnat—that is what he calls himself—knows how to read;
sometimes he knows how to write; he always knows how to daub. He does
not hesitate to acquire, by no one knows what mysterious mutual
instruction, all the talents which can be of use to the public; from
1815 to 1830, he imitated the cry of the turkey; from 1830 to 1848, he
scrawled pears on the walls. On﻿ersité, one of these scamps was putting his thumb to his nose at
the carriage gate of No. 69. “Why are you doing that at the gate?” a
passer-by asked. The boy replied: “There is a curé there.” It was
there, in fact, that the Papal Nuncio lived.

Nevertheless, whatever may be the Voltairianism of the small gamin, if
the occasion to become a chorister presents itself, it is quite
possible that he will accept, and in that case he serves the mass
civilly. There are two things to which he plays Tantalus, and wh﻿r_; such another is very
_malicious_; such another is _great_; such another is _ridiculous_.”
(All these words: traitor, malicious, great, ridiculous, have a
particular meaning in his mouth.) That one imagines that he owns the
Pont-Neuf, and he prevents _people_ from walking on the cornice outside
the parapet; that other has a mania for pulling _person’s_ ears; etc.,
etc.




CHAPTER IX—THE OLD SOUL OF GAUL


There was something of that boy in Poquelin, the son of the
fish-market; Beaumarchais had somethin﻿ of
Sainte-Geneviève familiarly to give orders to the phial of Saint
Januarius.

The gamin of Paris is respectful, ironical, and insolent. He has
villainous teeth, because he is badly fed and his stomach suffers, and
handsome eyes because he has wit. If Jehovah himself were present, he
would go hopping up the steps of paradise on one foot. He is strong on
boxing. All beliefs are possible to him. He plays in the gutter, and
straightens himself up with a revolt; his effrontery persists even in
the presence o﻿ X—ECCE PARIS, ECCE HOMO


To sum it all up once more, the Paris gamin of to-day, like the
_græculus_ of Rome in days gone by, is the infant populace with the
wrinkle of the old world on his brow.

The gamin is a grace to the nation, and at the same time a disease; a
disease which must be cured, how? By light.

Light renders healthy.

Light kindles.

All generous social irradiations spring from science, letters, arts,
education. Make men, make men. Give them light that they may warm you.
Sooner or later th﻿s and living
manners. He who sees Paris thinks he sees the bottom of all history
with heaven and constellations in the intervals. Paris has a capital,
the Town-Hall, a Parthenon, Notre-Dame, a Mount Aventine, the Faubourg
Saint-Antoine, an Asinarium, the Sorbonne, a Pantheon, the Pantheon, a
Via Sacra, the Boulevard des Italiens, a temple of the winds, opinion;
and it replaces the Gemoniæ by ridicule. Its _majo_ is called “faraud,”
its Transteverin is the man of the faubourgs, its _hammal_ is the
market-po﻿a Reynière discovered
larded roast beef, as Curtillus invented roast hedgehog, we see the
trapeze which figures in Plautus reappear under the vault of the Arc of
l’Etoile, the sword-eater of Pœcilus encountered by Apuleius is a
sword-swallower on the Pont-Neuf, the nephew of Rameau and Curculio the
parasite make a pair, Ergasilus could get himself presented to
Cambacères by d’Aigrefeuille; the four dandies of Rome: Alcesimarchus,
Phœdromus, Diabolus, and Argyrippus, descend from Courtille in
Labatut’s post﻿he: _Quis properantem me
prehendit pallio? _ The wine on Surêne is a parody of the wine of Alba,
the red border of Desaugiers forms a balance to the great cutting of
Balatro, Père-Lachaise exhales beneath nocturnal rains the same gleams
as the Esquiliæ, and the grave of the poor bought for five years, is
certainly the equivalent of the slave’s hived coffin.

Seek something that Paris has not. The vat of Trophonius contains
nothing that is not in Mesmer’s tub; Ergaphilas lives again in
Cagliostro; the Brahm﻿h their backs to each other, and
were thinking, each on his own account, the same things, in all
probability.

At the expiration of this hour, Aunt Gillenormand said:—“A pretty state
of things!”


A few moments later, Marius made his appearance. He entered. Even
before he had crossed the threshold, he saw his grandfather holding one
of his own cards in his hand, and on catching sight of him, the latter
exclaimed with his air of bourgeois and grinning superiority which was
something crushing:—

“Well! well!﻿ a century, beneath grape-shot and
bullets, in snow and mud by day, beneath rain at night, who captured
two flags, who received twenty wounds, who died forgotten and
abandoned, and who never committed but one mistake, which was to love
too fondly two ingrates, his country and myself.”


This was more than M. Gillenormand could bear to hear. At the word
_republic_, he rose, or, to speak more correctly, he sprang to his
feet. Every word that Marius had just uttered produced on the visage of
the old Royalist ﻿e here, you are no more a baron than my slipper is! They
were all bandits in the service of Robespierre! All who served
B-u-o-naparté were brigands! They were all traitors who betrayed,
betrayed, betrayed their legitimate king! All cowards who fled before
the Prussians and the English at Waterloo! That is what I do know!
Whether Monsieur your father comes in that category, I do not know! I
am sorry for it, so much the worse, your humble servant!”


In his turn, it was Marius who was the firebrand and M. Gi﻿ impossible for him to insult his grandfather and it was
equally impossible for him to leave his father unavenged. On the one
hand was a sacred grave, on the other hoary locks.

He stood there for several moments, staggering as though intoxicated,
with all this whirlwind dashing through his head; then he raised his
eyes, gazed fixedly at his grandfather, and cried in a voice of
thunder:—

“Down with the Bourbons, and that great hog of a Louis XVIII.!”


Louis XVIII. had been dead for four years; but it was﻿ghter, who was watching this
encounter with the stupefied air of an antiquated lamb, and said to her
with a smile that was almost calm: “A baron like this gentleman, and a
bourgeois like myself cannot remain under the same roof.”


And drawing himself up, all at once, pallid, trembling, terrible, with
his brow rendered more lofty by the terrible radiance of wrath, he
extended his arm towards Marius and shouted to him:—

“Be off!”


Marius left the house.

On the following day, M. Gillenormand said to his d﻿tic
dramas. They augment the grievances in such cases, although, in
reality, the wrongs are not increased by them. While carrying Marius’
“duds” precipitately to his chamber, at his grandfather’s command,
Nicolette had, inadvertently, let fall, probably, on the attic
staircase, which was dark, that medallion of black shagreen which
contained the paper penned by the colonel. Neither paper nor case could
afterwards be found. Marius was convinced that “Monsieur
Gillenormand”—from that day forth he never allud﻿ourse at hap-hazard towards the Latin
quarter.

What was to become of Marius?




BOOK FOURTH—THE FRIENDS OF THE A B C




CHAPTER I—A GROUP WHICH BARELY MISSED BECOMING HISTORIC


At that epoch, which was, to all appearances indifferent, a certain
revolutionary quiver was vaguely current. Breaths which had started
forth from the depths of ’89 and ’93 were in the air. Youth was on the
point, may the reader pardon us the word, of moulting. People were
undergoing a transformation, almost without being consci﻿iod. Opinions traverse phases.
Voltairian royalism, a quaint variety, had a no less singular sequel,
Bonapartist liberalism.

Other groups of minds were more serious. In that direction, they
sounded principles, they attached themselves to the right. They grew
enthusiastic for the absolute, they caught glimpses of infinite
realizations; the absolute, by its very rigidity, urges spirits towards
the sky and causes them to float in illimitable space. There is nothing
like dogma for bringing forth dreams. And t﻿ce any of those vast underlying
organizations, like the German _tugendbund_ and Italian Carbonarism;
but here and there there were dark underminings, which were in process
of throwing off shoots. The Cougourde was being outlined at Aix; there
existed at Paris, among other affiliations of that nature, the society
of the Friends of the A B C.

What were these Friends of the A B C? A society which had for its
object apparently the education of children, in reality the elevation
of man.

They declared themselv﻿f coteries ended
in heroes. They assembled in Paris in two localities, near the
fish-market, in a wine-shop called _Corinthe_, of which more will be
heard later on, and near the Pantheon in a little café in the Rue
Saint-Michel called the _Café Musain_, now torn down; the first of
these meeting-places was close to the workingman, the second to the
students.

The assemblies of the Friends of the A B C were usually held in a back
room of the Café Musain.

This hall, which was tolerably remote from the café, ﻿rking classes. Here are the names of the
principal ones. They belong, in a certain measure, to history:
Enjolras, Combeferre, Jean Prouvaire, Feuilly, Courfeyrac, Bahorel,
Lesgle or Laigle, Joly, Grantaire.

These young men formed a sort of family, through the bond of
friendship. All, with the exception of Laigle, were from the South.


  Enlarge

Friends of the a B C  3b4-1-abc-friends


This was a remarkable group. It vanished in the invisible depths which
lie behind us. At the point of this drama which ﻿lready, in some previous state of existence, traversed the
revolutionary apocalypse. He possessed the tradition of it as though he
had been a witness. He was acquainted with all the minute details of
the great affair. A pontifical and warlike nature, a singular thing in
a youth. He was an officiating priest and a man of war; from the
immediate point of view, a soldier of the democracy; above the
contemporary movement, the priest of the ideal. His eyes were deep, his
lids a little red, his lower lip was thi﻿as on earth a thing called woman. He had but one
passion—the right; but one thought—to overthrow the obstacle. On Mount
Aventine, he would have been Gracchus; in the Convention, he would have
been Saint-Just. He hardly saw the roses, he ignored spring, he did not
hear the carolling of the birds; the bare throat of Evadne would have
moved him no more than it would have moved Aristogeiton; he, like
Harmodius, thought flowers good for nothing except to conceal the
sword. He was severe in his enjoyments. He ch﻿ stooped and picked
it up. It was a sort of envelope which appeared to contain papers.

“Good,” he said to himself, “those unhappy girls dropped it.”


He retraced his steps, he called, he did not find them; he reflected
that they must already be far away, put the package in his pocket, and
went off to dine.

On the way, he saw in an alley of the Rue Mouffetard, a child’s coffin,
covered with a black cloth resting on three chairs, and illuminated by
a candle. The two girls of the twilight recurred to his m﻿ing to me, only formerly they were angels and now they are
ghouls.”





CHAPTER III—QUADRIFRONS


That evening, as he was undressing preparatory to going to bed, his
hand came in contact, in the pocket of his coat, with the packet which
he had picked up on the boulevard. He had forgotten it. He thought that
it would be well to open it, and that this package might possibly
contain the address of the young girls, if it really belonged to them,
and, in any case, the information necessary to a restitution to ﻿eived as follows:—

Madame la Marquise: The virtue of clemency and piety is that which most
closely unites sosiety. Turn your Christian spirit and cast a look of
compassion on this unfortunate Spanish victim of loyalty and attachment
to the sacred cause of legitimacy, who has given with his blood,
consecrated his fortune, evverything, to defend that cause, and to-day
finds himself in the greatest missery. He doubts not that your
honorable person will grant succor to preserve an existence exteremely
painful﻿ him to
continue his travells.


No address was joined to the signature. Marius hoped to find the
address in the second letter, whose superscription read: _À Madame,
Madame la Comtesse de Montvernet, Rue Cassette, No. 9_. This is what
Marius read in it:—

Madame la Comtesse:  It is an unhappy mother of a family of six
children the last of which is only eight months old.  I sick
since my last confinement, abandoned by my husband five months ago,
haveing no resources in the world the most frightful indigance﻿he subject
is historical, and the action takes place in Auvergne in the time
of the Empire; the style, I think, is natural, laconic, and may have
some merit.  There are couplets to be sung in four places.  The comic,
the serious, the unexpected, are mingled in a variety of characters,
and a tinge of romanticism lightly spread through all the intrigue
which proceeds misteriously, and ends, after striking altarations,
in the midst of many beautiful strokes of brilliant scenes.

My principal object is to sati﻿my daughter who will
explain our indigant situation to you, lacking bread and fire
in this wynter season.  When I say to you that I beg you to accept
the dedication of my drama which I desire to make to you and of all
those that I shall make, is to prove to you how great is my ambition
to have the honor of sheltering myself under your protection,
and of adorning my writings with your name.  If you deign to honor
me with the most modest offering, I shall immediately occupy myself
in making a piesse of verse﻿ter. The address ran: _To the
benevolent Gentleman of the church of Saint-Jacques-du-haut-Pas_. It
contained the following lines:—

Benevolent Man:  If you deign to accompany my daughter, you will
behold a misserable calamity, and I will show you my certificates.

At the aspect of these writings your generous soul will be moved
with a sentiment of obvious benevolence, for true philosophers
always feel lively emotions.

Admit, compassionate man, that it is necessary to suffer the most
cruel need, and that i﻿ant,
P. Fabantou, dramatic artist.


After perusing these four letters, Marius did not find himself much
further advanced than before.

In the first place, not one of the signers gave his address.

Then, they seemed to come from four different individuals, Don Alvarès,
Mistress Balizard, the poet Genflot, and dramatic artist Fabantou; but
the singular thing about these letters was, that all four were written
by the same hand.

What conclusion was to be drawn from this, except that they all come
from the sa﻿ mystification.
Marius was too melancholy to take even a chance pleasantry well, and to
lend himself to a game which the pavement of the street seemed desirous
of playing with him. It seemed to him that he was playing the part of
the blind man in blind man’s buff between the four letters, and that
they were making sport of him.

Nothing, however, indicated that these letters belonged to the two
young girls whom Marius had met on the boulevard. After all, they were
evidently papers of no value. Marius repla﻿, been robbed of an old pair of boots, to the great triumph
of Ma’am Bougon.

There came a second knock, as gentle as the first.

“Come in,” said Marius.

The door opened.

“What do you want, Ma’am Bougon?” asked Marius, without raising his
eyes from the books and manuscripts on his table.

A voice which did not belong to Ma’am Bougon replied:—

“Excuse me, sir—”


It was a dull, broken, hoarse, strangled voice, the voice of an old
man, roughened with brandy and liquor.

Marius turned round hastily, and be﻿ged from
her chemise, a blond and lymphatic pallor, earth-colored collar-bones,
red hands, a half-open and degraded mouth, missing teeth, dull, bold,
base eyes; she had the form of a young girl who has missed her youth,
and the look of a corrupt old woman; fifty years mingled with fifteen;
one of those beings which are both feeble and horrible, and which cause
those to shudder whom they do not cause to weep.

Marius had risen, and was staring in a sort of stupor at this being,
who was almost like the forms﻿He thought he remembered
having seen it somewhere.

“What do you wish, Mademoiselle?” he asked.

The young girl replied in her voice of a drunken convict:—

“Here is a letter for you, Monsieur Marius.”


She called Marius by his name; he could not doubt that he was the
person whom she wanted; but who was this girl? How did she know his
name?

Without waiting for him to tell her to advance, she entered. She
entered resolutely, staring, with a sort of assurance that made the
heart bleed, at the whole room an﻿hter will tell you that we have been without a morsel
of bread for two days, four persons and my spouse ill.  If I am
not deseaved in my opinion, I think I may hope that your generous
heart will melt at this statement and the desire will subjugate you
to be propitious to me by daigning to lavish on me a slight favor.

I am with the distinguished consideration which is due to the
benefactors of humanity,—

Jondrette.

P.S. My eldest daughter will await your orders, dear Monsieur Marius.


This letter, comin﻿aring each other like men of
Auvergne.”


Bigrenaille drew out a pistol which he had kept concealed under his
blouse, and put it in Thénardier’s hand, whispering in the latter’s
ear:—

“It’s Javert. I don’t dare fire at that man. Do you dare?”


“Parbleu!” replied Thénardier.

“Well, then, fire.”


Thénardier took the pistol and aimed at Javert.

Javert, who was only three paces from him, stared intently at him and
contented himself with saying:—

“Come now, don’t fire. You’ll miss fire.”


Thénardier pull﻿ng round and calling behind him:—

“Come in now!”


A squad of policemen, sword in hand, and agents armed with bludgeons
and cudgels, rushed in at Javert’s summons. They pinioned the ruffians.

This throng of men, sparely lighted by the single candle, filled the
den with shadows.

“Handcuff them all!” shouted Javert.

“Come on!” cried a voice which was not the voice of a man, but of which
no one would ever have said: “It is a woman’s voice.”


The Thénardier woman had entrenched herself in one of the angle﻿ the garret.

The Thénardier woman cast a glance at the ruffians who had allowed
themselves to be pinioned, and muttered in hoarse and guttural
accents:—

“The cowards!”


Javert smiled, and advanced across the open space which the Thénardier
was devouring with her eyes.

“Don’t come near me,” she cried, “or I’ll crush you.”


“What a grenadier!” ejaculated Javert; “you’ve got a beard like a man,
mother, but I have claws like a woman.”


And he continued to advance.

The Thénardier, dishevelled and terribl﻿in force, and in a few seconds Javert’s order
had been executed.

The Thénardier female, overwhelmed, stared at her pinioned hands, and
at those of her husband, who had dropped to the floor, and exclaimed,
weeping:—

“My daughters!”


“They are in the jug,” said Javert.

In the meanwhile, the agents had caught sight of the drunken man asleep
behind the door, and were shaking him:—

He awoke, stammering:—

“Is it all over, Jondrette?”


“Yes,” replied Javert.

The six pinioned ruffians were standing, and st﻿h, Claquesous.”


At that moment, he caught sight of the ruffians’ prisoner, who, ever
since the entrance of the police, had not uttered a word, and had held
his head down.

“Untie the gentleman!” said Javert, “and let no one go out!”


That said, he seated himself with sovereign dignity before the table,
where the candle and the writing-materials still remained, drew a
stamped paper from his pocket, and began to prepare his report.

When he had written the first lines, which are formulas that never
vary, ﻿tention was diverted from him, to
dash out of the window.

An agent sprang to the opening and looked out. He saw no one outside.

The rope ladder was still shaking.

“The devil!” ejaculated Javert between his teeth, “he must have been
the most valuable of the lot.”





CHAPTER XXII—THE LITTLE ONE WHO WAS CRYING IN VOLUME TWO


On the day following that on which these events took place in the house
on the Boulevard de l’Hôpital, a child, who seemed to be coming from
the direction of the bridge of Austerlit﻿e word _enormous_ the second time with a jeering swell
of the voice which might be tolerably well represented by capitals: “an
enormous, ENORMOUS dog.”


The old woman straightened herself up in a fury.

“Nasty brat!” she grumbled. “If I hadn’t been bending over, I know well
where I would have planted my foot on you.”


The boy was already far away.

“Kisss! kisss!” he cried. “After that, I don’t think I was mistaken!”


The old woman, choking with indignation, now rose completely upright,
and the red glea﻿rbeaux—”


At the end of these three lines he paused. He had arrived in front of
No. 50-52, and finding the door fastened, he began to assault it with
resounding and heroic kicks, which betrayed rather the man’s shoes that
he was wearing than the child’s feet which he owned.

In the meanwhile, the very old woman whom he had encountered at the
corner of the Rue du Petit-Banquier hastened up behind him, uttering
clamorous cries and indulging in lavish and exaggerated gestures.

“What’s this? What’s this? Lor﻿tunately, wasted in the dark:—

“There’s no one here.”


“Bah!” retorted the boy, “where’s my father?”


“At La Force.”


“Come, now! And my mother?”


“At Saint-Lazare.”


“Well! And my sisters?”


“At the Madelonettes.”


The lad scratched his head behind his ear, stared at Ma’am Bougon, and
said:—

“Ah!”


Then he executed a pirouette on his heel; a moment later, the old
woman, who had remained on the door-step, heard him singing in his
clear, young voice, as he plunged under the black elm-trees, in the﻿ July, form one of the most peculiar and striking moments
of history. These two years rise like two mountains midway between
those which precede and those which follow them. They have a
revolutionary grandeur. Precipices are to be distinguished there. The
social masses, the very assizes of civilization, the solid group of
superposed and adhering interests, the century-old profiles of the
ancient French formation, appear and disappear in them every instant,
athwart the storm clouds of systems, of passions, ﻿p, tumult, and
which are nothing else than the arrival of a great nation at a
halting-place.

These epochs are peculiar and mislead the politicians who desire to
convert them to profit. In the beginning, the nation asks nothing but
repose; it thirsts for but one thing, peace; it has but one ambition,
to be small. Which is the translation of remaining tranquil. Of great
events, great hazards, great adventures, great men, thank God, we have
seen enough, we have them heaped higher than our heads. We would
exc﻿on of peace, of
tranquillity, of leisure; behold, they are content. But, at the same
time certain facts arise, compel recognition, and knock at the door in
their turn. These facts are the products of revolutions and wars, they
are, they exist, they have the right to install themselves in society,
and they do install themselves therein; and most of the time, facts are
the stewards of the household and fouriers32 who do nothing but prepare
lodgings for principles.

This, then, is what appears to philosophica﻿ect in 1662 and which the Bourbons did not even obtain a
glimpse of in 1814.

The predestined family, which returned to France when Napoleon fell,
had the fatal simplicity to believe that it was itself which bestowed,
and that what it had bestowed it could take back again; that the House
of Bourbon possessed the right divine, that France possessed nothing,
and that the political right conceded in the charter of Louis XVIII.
was merely a branch of the right divine, was detached by the House of
Bourbon and g﻿er side,
exactly at the point where the gap which he was meditating would have
been made, there was a sort of recumbent stone which formed a bench,
and on this bench was seated the old man of the garden, while the old
woman was standing in front of him. The old woman was grumbling.
Gavroche, who was not very discreet, listened.

“Monsieur Mabeuf!” said the old woman.

“Mabeuf!” thought Gavroche, “that name is a perfect farce.”


The old man who was thus addressed, did not stir. The old woman
repeated:—

“M﻿being paid. She will no longer leave her
fagots. What will you warm yourself with this winter? We shall have no
wood.”


“There is the sun.”


“The butcher refuses to give credit; he will not let us have any more
meat.”


“That is quite right. I do not digest meat well. It is too heavy.”


“What shall we have for dinner?”


“Bread.”


“The baker demands a settlement, and says, ‘no money, no bread.’”


“That is well.”


“What will you eat?”


“We have apples in the apple-room.”


“But, Monsieur, we can’t li﻿ian breathe.

Then, by way of dinner, he tried to sleep.

It was a cat-nap, with one eye open. While he dozed, Gavroche kept on
the watch.

The twilight pallor of the sky blanched the earth, and the lane formed
a livid line between two rows of dark bushes.

All at once, in this whitish band, two figures made their appearance.
One was in front, the other some distance in the rear.

“There come two creatures,” muttered Gavroche.

The first form seemed to be some elderly bourgeois, who was bent and
thoughtful﻿at the waist. The head was
held erect with a sort of robust grace, and beneath the hat the pale
profile of a young man could be made out in the dim light. The profile
had a rose in its mouth. This second form was well known to Gavroche;
it was Montparnasse.

He could have told nothing about the other, except that he was a
respectable old man.

Gavroche immediately began to take observations.

One of these two pedestrians evidently had a project connected with the
other. Gavroche was well placed to watch th﻿mouthfuls
for that redoubtable ruffian eighteen years of age.

While Gavroche was deliberating, the attack took place, abruptly and
hideously. The attack of the tiger on the wild ass, the attack of the
spider on the fly. Montparnasse suddenly tossed away his rose, bounded
upon the old man, seized him by the collar, grasped and clung to him,
and Gavroche with difficulty restrained a scream. A moment later one of
these men was underneath the other, groaning, struggling, with a knee
of marble upon his breast.﻿sorbed and deafened as they
were, each by the other, as their breath mingled in the struggle.

Silence ensued. Montparnasse ceased his struggles. Gavroche indulged in
this aside: “Can he be dead!”


The goodman had not uttered a word, nor given vent to a cry. He rose to
his feet, and Gavroche heard him say to Montparnasse:—

“Get up.”


Montparnasse rose, but the goodman held him fast. Montparnasse’s
attitude was the humiliated and furious attitude of the wolf who has
been caught by a sheep.

Gavroche look﻿ing be done for you? What would you like to
be?”


“A thief.”


A pause ensued. The old man seemed absorbed in profound thought. He
stood motionless, and did not relax his hold on Montparnasse.

Every moment the vigorous and agile young ruffian indulged in the
twitchings of a wild beast caught in a snare. He gave a jerk, tried a
crook of the knee, twisted his limbs desperately, and made efforts to
escape.

The old man did not appear to notice it, and held both his arms with
one hand, with the sovereign ind﻿our guard against it, it is crafty
and ferocious; if it catches hold of the skirt of your coat, you will
be drawn in bodily. That machine is laziness. Stop while there is yet
time, and save yourself! Otherwise, it is all over with you; in a short
time you will be among the gearing. Once entangled, hope for nothing
more. Toil, lazybones! there is no more repose for you! The iron hand
of implacable toil has seized you. You do not wish to earn your living,
to have a task, to fulfil a duty! It bores you to be ﻿eem to you that they are resting. The laborer, the harvester,
the sailor, the blacksmith, will appear to you in glory like the
blessed spirits in paradise. What radiance surrounds the forge! To
guide the plough, to bind the sheaves, is joy. The bark at liberty in
the wind, what delight! Do you, lazy idler, delve, drag on, roll,
march! Drag your halter. You are a beast of burden in the team of hell!
Ah! To do nothing is your object. Well, not a week, not a day, not an
hour shall you have free from oppressio﻿y gives his door a push, and there he is in the open air.
If you wish to go out, you will be obliged to pierce your wall. What
does every one who wants to step into the street do? He goes
downstairs; you will tear up your sheets, little by little you will
make of them a rope, then you will climb out of your window, and you
will suspend yourself by that thread over an abyss, and it will be
night, amid storm, rain, and the hurricane, and if the rope is too
short, but one way of descending will remain to you,﻿
locksmith. If you wish to pass out, you will be condemned to execute a
terrible work of art; you will take a large sou, you will cut it in two
plates; with what tools? You will have to invent them. That is your
business. Then you will hollow out the interior of these plates, taking
great care of the outside, and you will make on the edges a thread, so
that they can be adjusted one upon the other like a box and its cover.
The top and bottom thus screwed together, nothing will be suspected. To
the overseers﻿ recompense if it becomes known
that you are the author? The dungeon. There is your future. What
precipices are idleness and pleasure! Do you know that to do nothing is
a melancholy resolution? To live in idleness on the property of
society! to be useless, that is to say, pernicious! This leads straight
to the depth of wretchedness. Woe to the man who desires to be a
parasite! He will become vermin! Ah! So it does not please you to work?
Ah! You have but one thought, to drink well, to eat well, to sleep
we﻿ich dogs would not touch, eating beans
that the worms have eaten before you. You will be a wood-louse in a
cellar. Ah! Have pity on yourself, you miserable young child, who were
sucking at nurse less than twenty years ago, and who have, no doubt, a
mother still alive! I conjure you, listen to me, I entreat you. You
desire fine black cloth, varnished shoes, to have your hair curled and
sweet-smelling oils on your locks, to please low women, to be handsome.
You will be shaven clean, and you will wear a red b﻿ds to the discovery
of the remedy. Our civilization, the work of twenty centuries, is its
law and its prodigy; it is worth the trouble of saving. It will be
saved. It is already much to have solaced it; its enlightenment is yet
another point. All the labors of modern social philosophies must
converge towards this point. The thinker of to-day has a great duty—to
auscultate civilization.

We repeat, that this auscultation brings encouragement; it is by this
persistence in encouragement that we wish to conclu﻿as though we might almost put this
question, when we behold so much terrible darkness. Melancholy
face-to-face encounter of selfish and wretched. On the part of the
selfish, the prejudices, shadows of costly education, appetite
increasing through intoxication, a giddiness of prosperity which dulls,
a fear of suffering which, in some, goes as far as an aversion for the
suffering, an implacable satisfaction, the _I_ so swollen that it bars
the soul; on the side of the wretched covetousness, envy, hatred of
s﻿ of the clouds.




BOOK EIGHTH—ENCHANTMENTS AND DESOLATIONS




CHAPTER I—FULL LIGHT


The reader has probably understood that Éponine, having recognized
through the gate, the inhabitant of that Rue Plumet whither Magnon had
sent her, had begun by keeping the ruffians away from the Rue Plumet,
and had then conducted Marius thither, and that, after many days spent
in ecstasy before that gate, Marius, drawn on by that force which draws
the iron to the magnet and a lover towards the stones of which is built
﻿of being seen.

Beginning with that blessed and holy hour when a kiss betrothed these
two souls, Marius was there every evening. If, at that period of her
existence, Cosette had fallen in love with a man in the least
unscrupulous or debauched, she would have been lost; for there are
generous natures which yield themselves, and Cosette was one of them.
One of woman’s magnanimities is to yield. Love, at the height where it
is absolute, is complicated with some indescribably celestial blindness
of modesty. Bu﻿eart is the one which
sheds the most light, alas! and the most darkness.

God willed that Cosette’s love should encounter one of the loves which
save.

Throughout the whole of the month of May of that year 1832, there were
there, in every night, in that poor, neglected garden, beneath that
thicket which grew thicker and more fragrant day by day, two beings
composed of all chastity, all innocence, overflowing with all the
felicity of heaven, nearer to the archangels than to mankind, pure,
honest, intoxicate﻿arius, since that
time, had not gone further than to touch Cosette’s hand, or her
kerchief, or a lock of her hair, with his lips. For him, Cosette was a
perfume and not a woman. He inhaled her. She refused nothing, and he
asked nothing. Cosette was happy, and Marius was satisfied. They lived
in this ecstatic state which can be described as the dazzling of one
soul by another soul. It was the ineffable first embrace of two maiden
souls in the ideal. Two swans meeting on the Jungfrau.

At that hour of love, ﻿there, that garden seemed a living and a
sacred spot. All flowers unfolded around them and sent them incense;
and they opened their souls and scattered them over the flowers. The
wanton and vigorous vegetation quivered, full of strength and
intoxication, around these two innocents, and they uttered words of
love which set the trees to trembling.

What words were these? Breaths. Nothing more. These breaths sufficed to
trouble and to touch all nature round about. Magic power which we
should find it difficult﻿rth the
trouble of saying and hearing!

The man who has never heard, the man who has never uttered these
absurdities, these paltry remarks, is an imbecile and a malicious
fellow. Cosette said to Marius:—

“Dost thou know?—”


[In all this and athwart this celestial maidenliness, and without
either of them being able to say how it had come about, they had begun
to call each other _thou_.]

“Dost thou know? My name is Euphrasie.”


“Euphrasie? Why, no, thy name is Cosette.”


“Oh! Cosette is a very ugly name﻿you
are not at all stupid, you are much more learned than I am, but I bid
you defiance with this word: I love you!”


And Marius, in the very heavens, thought he heard a strain sung by a
star.

Or she bestowed on him a gentle tap because he coughed, and she said to
him:—

“Don’t cough, sir; I will not have people cough on my domain without my
permission. It’s very naughty to cough and to disturb me. I want you to
be well, because, in the first place, if you were not well, I should be
very unhappy. What sho﻿esh, before which
that immense and innocent love recoiled with a sort of sacred fright.

Marius pictured life with Cosette to himself like this, without
anything else; to come every evening to the Rue Plumet, to displace the
old and accommodating bar of the chief-justice’s gate, to sit elbow to
elbow on that bench, to gaze through the trees at the scintillation of
the on-coming night, to fit a fold of the knee of his trousers into the
ample fall of Cosette’s gown, to caress her thumb-nail, to call her
_tho﻿there
with its sweet tiny point, while it hides itself. The heart draws back
before voluptuousness only to love the more. Marius’ blandishments, all
saturated with fancy, were, so to speak, of azure hue. The birds when
they fly up yonder, in the direction of the angels, must hear such
words. There were mingled with them, nevertheless, life, humanity, all
the positiveness of which Marius was capable. It was what is said in
the bower, a prelude to what will be said in the chamber; a lyrical
effusion, strophe﻿ittle! You talk
astonishingly good sense. It seems to me at times that you are a dream.
Speak, I listen, I admire. Oh Cosette! how strange it is and how
charming! I am really beside myself. You are adorable, Mademoiselle. I
study your feet with the microscope and your soul with the telescope.”


And Cosette answered:—

“I have been loving a little more all the time that has passed since
this morning.”


Questions and replies took care of themselves in this dialogue, which
always turned with mutual consent ﻿ the convent,
talked with exquisite penetration and uttered, at times, all sorts of
true and delicate sayings. Her prattle was conversation. She never made
a mistake about anything, and she saw things justly. The woman feels
and speaks with the tender instinct of the heart, which is infallible.

No one understands so well as a woman, how to say things that are, at
once, both sweet and deep. Sweetness and depth, they are the whole of
woman; in them lies the whole of heaven.

In this full felicity, tears wel﻿ disgusting even to think of. What paper! What ink!
What scrawling! And all that has been written! What rascal was it who
said that man was a featherless biped?51 And then, I met a pretty girl
of my acquaintance, who is as beautiful as the spring, worthy to be
called Floréal, and who is delighted, enraptured, as happy as the
angels, because a wretch yesterday, a frightful banker all spotted with
small-pox, deigned to take a fancy to her! Alas! woman keeps on the
watch for a protector as much as for a lover﻿es have this advantage or disadvantage over women, that the traces
left upon them by caterpillars are visible. Ah! there is no morality on
earth. I call to witness the myrtle, the symbol of love, the laurel,
the symbol of air, the olive, that ninny, the symbol of peace, the
apple-tree which came nearest rangling Adam with its pips, and the
fig-tree, the grandfather of petticoats. As for right, do you know what
right is? The Gauls covet Clusium, Rome protects Clusium, and demands
what wrong Clusium has done﻿d out his glass to Joly, who filled it, then he drank and went
on, having hardly been interrupted by this glass of wine, of which no
one, not even himself, had taken any notice:—

“Brennus, who takes Rome, is an eagle; the banker who takes the
grisette is an eagle. There is no more modesty in the one case than in
the other. So we believe in nothing. There is but one reality: drink.
Whatever your opinion may be in favor of the lean cock, like the Canton
of Uri, or in favor of the fat cock, like the Canton o﻿I’d lead the human race in a straightforward
way, I’d weave matters mesh by mesh, without breaking the thread, I
would have no provisional arrangements, I would have no extraordinary
repertory. What the rest of you call progress advances by means of two
motors, men and events. But, sad to say, from time to time, the
exceptional becomes necessary. The ordinary troupe suffices neither for
event nor for men: among men geniuses are required, among events
revolutions. Great accidents are the law; the order of t﻿letters, Napoleon on guard, the comet of 1811 at
the head of the poster. Ah! what a beautiful blue theatre all studded
with unexpected flashes! Boum! Boum! extraordinary show! Raise your
eyes, boobies. Everything is in disorder, the star as well as the
drama. Good God, it is too much and not enough. These resources,
gathered from exception, seem magnificence and poverty. My friends,
Providence has come down to expedients. What does a revolution prove?
That God is in a quandry. He effects a _coup d‘état_ be﻿ so many rags even in the perfectly new purple of the morning on
the crests of hills, when I see the drops of dew, those mock pearls,
when I see the frost, that paste, when I see humanity ripped apart and
events patched up, and so many spots on the sun and so many holes in
the moon, when I see so much misery everywhere, I suspect that God is
not rich. The appearance exists, it is true, but I feel that he is hard
up. He gives a revolution as a tradesman whose money-box is empty gives
a ball. God must not be﻿ the universe is
a tease. It’s like children, those who want them have none, and those
who don’t want them have them. Total: I’m vexed. Besides, Laigle de
Meaux, that bald-head, offends my sight. It humiliates me to think that
I am of the same age as that baldy. However, I criticise, but I do not
insult. The universe is what it is. I speak here without evil intent
and to ease my conscience. Receive, Eternal Father, the assurance of my
distinguished consideration. Ah! by all the saints of Olympus and by
all﻿eration, and occupying his leisure
with drying his breeches on his hedge, that is to say, his frontier.
Those are the positions for which I was born! Yes, I have said a Turk,
and I will not retract. I do not understand how people can habitually
take Turks in bad part; Mohammed had his good points; respect for the
inventor of seraglios with houris and paradises with odalisques! Let us
not insult Mohammedanism, the only religion which is ornamented with a
hen-roost! Now, I insist on a drink. The earth is a g﻿ Yes, behold me sad again. That’s what comes
of swallowing an oyster and a revolution the wrong way! I am growing
melancholy once more. Oh! frightful old world. People strive, turn each
other out, prostitute themselves, kill each other, and get used to it!”


And Grantaire, after this fit of eloquence, had a fit of coughing,
which was well earned.

“À propos of revolution,” said Joly, “it is decidedly abberent that
Barius is in lub.”


“Does any one know with whom?” demanded Laigle.

“Do.”


“No?”


“Do! I﻿ing his second bottle and, possibly, his second
harangue, when a new personage emerged from the square aperture of the
stairs. It was a boy less than ten years of age, ragged, very small,
yellow, with an odd phiz, a vivacious eye, an enormous amount of hair
drenched with rain, and wearing a contented air.

The child unhesitatingly making his choice among the three, addressed
himself to Laigle de Meaux.

“Are you Monsieur Bossuet?”


“That is my nickname,” replied Laigle. “What do you want with me?”


“This﻿ired Laigle.

“Navet, Gavroche’s friend.”


“Stay with us,” said Laigle.

“Breakfast with us,” said Grantaire.

The child replied:—

“I can’t, I belong in the procession, I’m the one to shout ‘Down with
Polignac!’”


And executing a prolonged scrape of his foot behind him, which is the
most respectful of all possible salutes, he took his departure.

The child gone, Grantaire took the word:—

“That is the pure-bred gamin. There are a great many varieties of the
gamin species. The notary’s gamin is called Sk﻿C, that is to say: the burial of Lamarque.”


“The tall blonde,” remarked Grantaire, “is Enjolras, who is sending you
a warning.”


“Shall we go?” ejaculated Bossuet.

“It’s raiding,” said Joly. “I have sworn to go through fire, but not
through water. I don’t wand to ged a gold.”


“I shall stay here,” said Grantaire. “I prefer a breakfast to a
hearse.”


“Conclusion: we remain,” said Laigle. “Well, then, let us drink.
Besides, we might miss the funeral without missing the riot.”


“Ah! the riot, I am with﻿he people, and open the umbrella end against heaven.”


The room was dark, large clouds had just finished the extinction of
daylight. There was no one in the wine-shop, or in the street, every
one having gone off “to watch events.”


“Is it midday or midnight?” cried Bossuet. “You can’t see your hand
before your face. Gibelotte, fetch a light.”


Grantaire was drinking in a melancholy way.

“Enjolras disdains me,” he muttered. “Enjolras said: ‘Joly is ill,
Grantaire is drunk.’ It was to Bossuet that he sen﻿ the extinguisher on their candles at such an early hour.
For the last hour, that boy had been creating an uproar in that
peaceable arrondissement, the uproar of a fly in a bottle. The sergeant
of the banlieue lent an ear. He waited. He was a prudent man.

The mad rattle of the cart, filled to overflowing the possible measure
of waiting, and decided the sergeant to make a reconnaisance.

“There’s a whole band of them there!” said he, “let us proceed gently.”


It was clear that the hydra of anarchy had eme﻿ere are you going, you rascal?” shouted the sergeant.

“Citizen,” retorted Gavroche, “I haven’t called you ‘bourgeois’ yet.
Why do you insult me?”


“Where are you going, you rogue?”


“Monsieur,” retorted Gavroche, “perhaps you were a man of wit
yesterday, but you have degenerated this morning.”


“I ask you where are you going, you villain?”


Gavroche replied:—

“You speak prettily. Really, no one would suppose you as old as you
are. You ought to sell all your hair at a hundred francs apiece. That
would﻿ by the
very means that have ruined them; Gavroche took in the whole situation
at a glance. It was the cart which had told against him, it was the
cart’s place to protect him.

At the moment when the sergeant was on the point of making his descent
on Gavroche, the cart, converted into a projectile and launched with
all the latter’s might, rolled down upon him furiously, and the
sergeant, struck full in the stomach, tumbled over backwards into the
gutter while his gun went off in the air.

The men of the po﻿ in the direction where the
fusillade was raging, lifted his left hand to a level with his nose and
thrust it forward three times, as he slapped the back of his head with
his right hand; an imperious gesture in which Parisian street-urchindom
has condensed French irony, and which is evidently efficacious, since
it has already lasted half a century.

This gayety was troubled by one bitter reflection.

“Yes,” said he, “I’m splitting with laughter, I’m twisting with
delight, I abound in joy, but I’m losing my﻿ule roula.
Où vont les belles filles,
Lon la.

“Vieux bon peuple, à coups de béquilles,
Cassons ce Louvre où s‘étala
La monarchie en falbala.
Où vont les belles filles,
Lon la.

“Nous en avons forcé les grilles,
Le roi Charles-Dix ce jour-là,
Tenait mal et se décolla.
Où vont les belles filles,
Lon la."57


The post’s recourse to arms was not without result. The cart was
conquered, the drunken man was taken prisoner. The first was put in the
pound, the second was later on somewhat harassed before the counc﻿

  Enlarge

Titlepage Volume Five




BOOK FIRST—THE WAR BETWEEN FOUR WALLS




CHAPTER I—THE CHARYBDIS OF THE FAUBOURG SAINT ANTOINE AND THE SCYLLA OF
THE FAUBOURG DU TEMPLE


The two most memorable barricades which the observer of social maladies
can name do not belong to the period in which the action of this work
is laid. These two barricades, both of them symbols, under two
different aspects, of a redoubtable situation, sprang from the earth at
the time of the fatal insurrection of June, 1848, the gr﻿ainst, the people.

Beggars attack the common right; the ochlocracy rises against demos.

These are melancholy days; for there is always a certain amount of
night even in this madness, there is suicide in this duel, and those
words which are intended to be insults—beggars, canaille, ochlocracy,
populace—exhibit, alas! rather the fault of those who reign than the
fault of those who suffer; rather the fault of the privileged than the
fault of the disinherited.

For our own part, we never pronounce those word﻿d all these miserable
people whence sprang the apostles and the martyrs, when he uttered this
mysterious saying: _“Fex urbis, lex orbis,”_—the dregs of the city, the
law of the earth.

The exasperations of this crowd which suffers and bleeds, its violences
contrary to all sense, directed against the principles which are its
life, its masterful deeds against the right, are its popular _coups
d‘état_ and should be repressed. The man of probity sacrifices himself,
and out of his very love for this crowd, he c﻿ almost
impossible of classification, in the philosophy of history. All the
words which we have just uttered, must be discarded, when it becomes a
question of this extraordinary revolt, in which one feels the holy
anxiety of toil claiming its rights. It was necessary to combat it, and
this was a duty, for it attacked the republic. But what was June, 1848,
at bottom? A revolt of the people against itself.

Where the subject is not lost sight of, there is no digression; may we,
then, be permitted to arrest t﻿rred the vast opening of the
faubourg, that is to say, three streets, from angle to angle; ravined,
jagged, cut up, divided, crenelated, with an immense rent, buttressed
with piles that were bastions in themselves throwing out capes here and
there, powerfully backed up by two great promontories of houses of the
faubourg, it reared itself like a cyclopean dike at the end of the
formidable place which had seen the 14th of July. Nineteen barricades
were ranged, one behind the other, in the depths of the stree﻿visation of the ebullition. Hold! take
this door! this grating! this penthouse! this chimney-piece! this
broken brazier! this cracked pot! Give all! cast away all! Push this
roll, dig, dismantle, overturn, ruin everything! It was the
collaboration of the pavement, the block of stone, the beam, the bar of
iron, the rag, the scrap, the broken pane, the unseated chair, the
cabbage-stalk, the tatter, the rag, and the malediction. It was grand
and it was petty. It was the abyss parodied on the public place by
h﻿chitects of this bit of savagery
had wished to add a touch of the street urchin humor to their terror,
presented its horseless, unharnessed pole to no one knows what horses
of the air. This gigantic heap, the alluvium of the revolt, figured to
the mind an Ossa on Pelion of all revolutions; ’93 on ’89, the 9th of
Thermidor on the 10th of August, the 18th of Brumaire on the 11th of
January, Vendemiaire on Prairial, 1848 on 1830. The situation deserved
the trouble and this barricade was worthy to figure on th﻿cesspool in that redoubt and something Olympian in
that confusion. One there beheld in a pell-mell full of despair, the
rafters of roofs, bits of garret windows with their figured paper,
window sashes with their glass planted there in the ruins awaiting the
cannon, wrecks of chimneys, cupboards, tables, benches, howling
topsyturveydom, and those thousand poverty-stricken things, the very
refuse of the mendicant, which contain at the same time fury and
nothingness. One would have said that it was the tatter﻿ean had escaped from the city, and, in the twinkling of an
eye, in the time required to lift the cover and to replace it, he had
passed from broad daylight to complete obscurity, from midday to
midnight, from tumult to silence, from the whirlwind of thunders to the
stagnation of the tomb, and, by a vicissitude far more tremendous even
than that of the Rue Polonceau, from the most extreme peril to the most
absolute obscurity.

An abrupt fall into a cavern; a disappearance into the secret trap-door
of Paris;﻿s first sensation was one of blindness. All of a sudden, he could see
nothing. It seemed to him too, that, in one instant, he had become
deaf. He no longer heard anything. The frantic storm of murder which
had been let loose a few feet above his head did not reach him, thanks
to the thickness of the earth which separated him from it, as we have
said, otherwise than faintly and indistinctly, and like a rumbling, in
the depths. He felt that the ground was solid under his feet; that was
all; but that was enou﻿omed to this cavern. He began to distinguish
something. The passage in which he had burrowed—no other word can
better express the situation—was walled in behind him. It was one of
those blind alleys, which the special jargon terms branches. In front
of him there was another wall, a wall like night. The light of the
air-hole died out ten or twelve paces from the point where Jean Valjean
stood, and barely cast a wan pallor on a few metres of the damp walls
of the sewer. Beyond, the opaqueness was massive; to﻿im up again,—that is the real word for it,—placed him on his
shoulders once more, and set out. He plunged resolutely into the gloom.

The truth is, that they were less safe than Jean Valjean fancied.
Perils of another sort and no less serious were awaiting them,
perchance. After the lightning-charged whirlwind of the combat, the
cavern of miasmas and traps; after chaos, the sewer. Jean Valjean had
fallen from one circle of hell into another.

When he had advanced fifty paces, he was obliged to halt. A prob﻿s Halles; that
if he were to choose the path to the left and follow the slope, he
would arrive, in less than a quarter of an hour, at some mouth on the
Seine between the Pont au Change and the Pont-Neuf, that is to say, he
would make his appearance in broad daylight on the most densely peopled
spot in Paris. Perhaps he would come out on some man-hole at the
intersection of streets. Amazement of the passers-by at beholding two
bleeding men emerge from the earth at their feet. Arrival of the
police, a call t﻿’ two arms were passed round his neck, and the former’s
feet dragged behind him. He held both these arms with one hand, and
groped along the wall with the other. Marius’ cheek touched his, and
clung there, bleeding. He felt a warm stream which came from Marius
trickling down upon him and making its way under his clothes. But a
humid warmth near his ear, which the mouth of the wounded man touched,
indicated respiration, and consequently, life. The passage along which
Jean Valjean was now proceeding was not ﻿le wavering light in this opaque gloom, or whether his
eyes had become accustomed to the obscurity, some vague vision returned
to him, and he began once more to gain a confused idea, now of the wall
which he touched, now of the vault beneath which he was passing. The
pupil dilates in the dark, and the soul dilates in misfortune and ends
by finding God there.

It was not easy to direct his course.

The line of the sewer re-echoes, so to speak, the line of the streets
which lie above it. There were then in P﻿as not so.
Under the Rue Saint-Denis there is an old stone sewer which dates from
Louis XIII. and which runs straight to the collecting sewer, called the
Grand Sewer, with but a single elbow, on the right, on the elevation of
the ancient Cour des Miracles, and a single branch, the Saint-Martin
sewer, whose four arms describe a cross. But the gut of the
Petite-Truanderie the entrance to which was in the vicinity of the
Corinthe wine-shop has never communicated with the sewer of the Rue
Saint-Denis; it ended﻿ the gloom like
an interrogation point; first, on his left, the vast sewer of the
Plâtrière, a sort of Chinese puzzle, thrusting out and entangling its
chaos of Ts and Zs under the Post-Office and under the rotunda of the
Wheat Market, as far as the Seine, where it terminates in a Y;
secondly, on his right, the curving corridor of the Rue du Cadran with
its three teeth, which are also blind courts; thirdly, on his left, the
branch of the Mail, complicated, almost at its inception, with a sort
of fork, and ﻿e subterranean gallery of the Rue Saint-Denis. Instead of the
ancient stone, instead of the antique architecture, haughty and royal
even in the sewer, with pavement and string courses of granite and
mortar costing eight hundred livres the fathom, he would have felt
under his hand contemporary cheapness, economical expedients, porous
stone filled with mortar on a concrete foundation, which costs two
hundred francs the metre, and the bourgeoise masonry known as _à petits
matériaux_—small stuff; but of all th﻿it. In this unknown, every step that he risked might be his last. How
was he to get out? should he find an issue? should he find it in time?
would that colossal subterranean sponge with its stone cavities, allow
itself to be penetrated and pierced? should he there encounter some
unexpected knot in the darkness? should he arrive at the inextricable
and the impassable? would Marius die there of hemorrhage and he of
hunger? should they end by both getting lost, and by furnishing two
skeletons in a nook of tha﻿he Seine? This
danger was a great one, but the peril of retreating was still greater.
He continued to advance.

It was not towards the Seine that he was proceeding. The ridge which
the soil of Paris forms on its right bank empties one of its watersheds
into the Seine and the other into the Grand Sewer. The crest of this
ridge which determines the division of the waters describes a very
capricious line. The culminating point, which is the point of
separation of the currents, is in the Sainte-Avoye sewer, be﻿that every narrower way must needs terminate in a blind
alley, and could only lead him further from his goal, that is to say,
the outlet. Thus he avoided the quadruple trap which was set for him in
the darkness by the four labyrinths which we have just enumerated.

At a certain moment, he perceived that he was emerging from beneath the
Paris which was petrified by the uprising, where the barricades had
suppressed circulation, and that he was entering beneath the living and
normal Paris. Overhead he suddenl﻿and. This was not a
serious matter; and he had not allowed any one to trouble himself about
it, nor to dress it, nor even to see his hurt, not even Cosette.
Nevertheless, this had forced him to swathe his hand in a linen
bandage, and to carry his arm in a sling, and had prevented his
signing. M. Gillenormand, in his capacity of Cosette’s
supervising-guardian, had supplied his place.

We will not conduct the reader either to the mayor’s office or to the
church. One does not follow a pair of lovers to that e﻿l. They were obliged to alter their course, and the
simplest way was to turn through the boulevard. One of the invited
guests observed that it was Shrove Tuesday, and that there would be a
jam of vehicles.—“Why?” asked M. Gillenormand—“Because of the
maskers.”—“Capital,” said the grandfather, “let us go that way. These
young folks are on the way to be married; they are about to enter the
serious part of life. This will prepare them for seeing a bit of the
masquerade.”


They went by way of the boulevard. T﻿,
Pantaloon and Clown persisted. In the good humor of that winter of
1833, Paris had disguised itself as Venice. Such Shrove Tuesdays are no
longer to be seen nowadays. Everything which exists being a scattered
Carnival, there is no longer any Carnival.

The sidewalks were overflowing with pedestrians and the windows with
curious spectators. The terraces which crown the peristyles of the
theatres were bordered with spectators. Besides the maskers, they
stared at that procession—peculiar to Shrove Tuesday a﻿ one downstream, the other upstream, the one
towards the Chaussée d’Antin, the other towards the Faubourg
Saint-Antoine. The carriages of the peers of France and of the
Ambassadors, emblazoned with coats of arms, held the middle of the way,
going and coming freely. Certain joyous and magnificent trains, notably
that of the Bœuf Gras, had the same privilege. In this gayety of Paris,
England cracked her whip; Lord Seymour’s post-chaise, harassed by a
nickname from the populace, passed with great noise.

In t﻿n of
vehicles; one or other of the two lateral files halted until the knot
was disentangled; one carriage delayed sufficed to paralyze the whole
line. Then they set out again on the march.

The wedding carriages were in the file proceeding towards the Bastille,
and skirting the right side of the Boulevard. At the top of the
Pont-aux-Choux, there was a stoppage. Nearly at the same moment, the
other file, which was proceeding towards the Madeleine, halted also. At
that point of the file there was a carriage-﻿who would have made Rabelais stop up his ears just
as the Mænads made Aristophanes drop his eyes, tow wigs, pink tights,
dandified hats, spectacles of a grimacer, three-cornered hats of Janot
tormented with a butterfly, shouts directed at pedestrians, fists on
hips, bold attitudes, bare shoulders, immodesty unchained; a chaos of
shamelessness driven by a coachman crowned with flowers; this is what
that institution was like.

Greece stood in need of the chariot of Thespis, France stands in need
of the hackn﻿ most
ancient days of the monarchy. The accounts of Louis XI. allot to the
bailiff of the palace “twenty sous, Tournois, for three coaches of
mascarades in the crossroads.” In our day, these noisy heaps of
creatures are accustomed to have themselves driven in some ancient
cuckoo carriage, whose imperial they load down, or they overwhelm a
hired landau, with its top thrown back, with their tumultuous groups.
Twenty of them ride in a carriage intended for six. They cling to the
seats, to the rumble, on the c﻿ople vociferate,
shout, howl, there they break forth and writhe with enjoyment; gayety
roars; sarcasm flames forth, joviality is flaunted like a red flag; two
jades there drag farce blossomed forth into an apotheosis; it is the
triumphal car of laughter.

A laughter that is too cynical to be frank. In truth, this laughter is
suspicious. This laughter has a mission. It is charged with proving the
Carnival to the Parisians.

These fishwife vehicles, in which one feels one knows not what shadows,
set the phil﻿n four wheels howling and laughing, that
they should clap their hands at this glory composed of all shames, that
there would be no festival for the populace, did not the police
promenade in their midst these sorts of twenty-headed hydras of joy.
But what can be done about it? These be-ribboned and be-flowered
tumbrils of mire are insulted and pardoned by the laughter of the
public. The laughter of all is the accomplice of universal degradation.
Certain unhealthy festivals disaggregate the people and conver﻿ave just said, that one of these shapeless
clusters of masked men and women, dragged about on a vast calash,
should halt on the left of the boulevard, while the wedding train
halted on the right. The carriage-load of masks caught sight of the
wedding carriage containing the bridal party opposite them on the other
side of the boulevard.

“Hullo!” said a masker, “here’s a wedding.”


“A sham wedding,” retorted another. “We are the genuine article.”


And, being too far off to accost the wedding party, and fe﻿etween the maskers and the crowd.

In the meanwhile, two other maskers in the same carriage, a Spaniard
with an enormous nose, an elderly air, and huge black moustache, and a
gaunt fishwife, who was quite a young girl, masked with a _loup_,67 had
also noticed the wedding, and while their companions and the passers-by
were exchanging insults, they had held a dialogue in a low voice.

Their aside was covered by the tumult and was lost in it. The gusts of
rain had drenched the front of the vehicle, which was ﻿you, thou, or I, in my life, if I don’t know
that Parisian.” [_pantinois_.]

“Paris in Pantin to-day.”


“Can you see the bride if you stoop down?”


“No.”


“And the bridegroom?”


“There’s no bridegroom in that trap.”


“Bah!”


“Unless it’s the old fellow.”


“Try to get a sight of the bride by stooping very low.”


“I can’t.”


“Never mind, that old cove who has something the matter with his paw I
know, and that I’m positive.”


“And what good does it do to know him?”


“No one can tell. Sometimes it d﻿an’t quit the vehicle.”


“Why not?”


“I’m hired.”


“Ah, the devil!”


“I owe my fishwife day to the prefecture.”


“That’s true.”


“If I leave the cart, the first inspector who gets his eye on me will
arrest me. You know that well enough.”


“Yes, I do.”


“I’m bought by the government for to-day.”


“All the same, that old fellow bothers me.”


“Do the old fellows bother you? But you’re not a young girl.”


“He’s in the first carriage.”


“Well?”


“In the bride’s trap.”


“What then?”


“So he is the﻿ou, tou, for Chatou, I have but
one God, one King, one half-farthing, and one boot. And these two poor
little wolves were as tipsy as sparrows from having drunk dew and thyme
very early in the morning. And these two poor little things were as
drunk as thrushes in a vineyard; a tiger laughed at them in his cave.
The one cursed, the other swore. When shall we go to the forest?
Charlot asked Charlotte.]



47 (return) [ There swings the horrible skeleton of a poor lover who
hung himself.]



48 (return) [ She﻿ur sweet life, when we were both so
young, and when we had no other desire in our hearts than to be well
dressed and in love? When, by adding your age to my age, we could not
count forty years between us, and when, in our humble and tiny
household, everything was spring to us even in winter. Fair days!
Manuel was proud and wise, Paris sat at sacred banquets, Foy launched
thunderbolts, and your corsage had a pin on which I pricked myself.
Everything gazed upon you. A briefless lawyer, when I took you to the﻿ mouth had not uttered a thing when thy heart
had already responded. The Sorbonne was the bucolic spot where I adored
thee from eve till morn. ‘Tis thus that an amorous soul applies the
chart of the Tender to the Latin country. O Place Maubert! O Place
Dauphine! When in the fresh spring-like hut thou didst draw thy
stocking on thy delicate leg, I saw a star in the depths of the garret.
I have read a great deal of Plato, but nothing of it remains by me;
better than Malebranche and then Lamennais thou didst ﻿thenware bowl and I gave thee the Japanese
cup. And those great misfortunes which made us laugh! Thy cuff
scorched, thy boa lost! And that dear portrait of the divine
Shakespeare which we sold one evening that we might sup! I was a beggar
and thou wert charitable. I kissed thy fresh round arms in haste. A
folio Dante served us as a table on which to eat merrily a centime’s
worth of chestnuts. The first time that, in my joyous den, I snatched a
kiss from thy fiery lip, when thou wentest forth, dishevelled a﻿yesterday, Atala
Went off with a Russian,
Where fair maids go.
Lon la.


My friend Pierrot, thou pratest, because Mila knocked at her pane the
other day and called me. The jades are very charming, their poison
which bewitched me would intoxicate Monsieur Orfila. I’m fond of love
and its bickerings, I love Agnes, I love Pamela, Lise burned herself in
setting me aflame. In former days when I saw the mantillas of Suzette
and of Zéila, my soul mingled with their folds. Love, when thou
gleamest in the dark thou﻿lled. Good old folks, let us smash with our crutches that Louvre
where the monarchy displayed itself in furbelows. We have forced its
gates. On that day, King Charles X. did not stick well and came
unglued.]



58 (return) [ Steps on the Aventine Hill, leading to the Tiber, to
which the bodies of executed criminals were dragged by hooks to be
thrown into the Tiber.]



59 (return) [ Mustards.]



60 (return) [ From _casser_, to break: break-necks.]



61 (return) [ “Jeanne was born at Fougère, a true sheph﻿m hand to
mouth.”]



65 (return) [ “Triton trotted on before, and drew from his conch-shell
sounds so ravishing that he delighted everyone!”]



66 (return) [ “A Shrove-Tuesday marriage will have no ungrateful
children.”]



67 (return) [ A short mask.]



68 (return) [ In allusion to the story of Prometheus.]



69 (return) [ _Un fafiot sérieux. Fafiot_ is the slang term for a
bank-bill, derived from its rustling noise.]



70 (return) [ He sleeps. Although his fate was very strange, he lived.
He died wh﻿old editions will
be renamed.

Creating the works from print editions not protected by U.S. copyright
law means that no one owns a United States copyright in these works,
so the Foundation (and you!) can copy and distribute it in the United
States without permission and without paying copyright
royalties. Special rules, set forth in the General Terms of Use part
of this license, apply to copying and distributing Project
Gutenberg-tm electronic works to protect the PROJECT GUTENBERG-tm
concept and trademark﻿tion is subject to the
trademark license, especially commercial redistribution.

START: FULL LICENSE

THE FULL PROJECT GUTENBERG LICENSE
PLEASE READ THIS BEFORE YOU DISTRIBUTE OR USE THIS WORK

To protect the Project Gutenberg-tm mission of promoting the free
distribution of electronic works, by using or distributing this work
(or any other work associated in any way with the phrase "Project
Gutenberg"), you agree to comply with all the terms of the Full
Project Gutenberg-tm License available with this fil﻿ctronic works in your
possession. If you paid a fee for obtaining a copy of or access to a
Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work and you do not agree to be bound
by the terms of this agreement, you may obtain a refund from the
person or entity to whom you paid the fee as set forth in paragraph
1.E.8.

1.B. "Project Gutenberg" is a registered trademark. It may only be
used on or associated in any way with an electronic work by people who
agree to be bound by the terms of this agreement. There are a few
thing﻿ Project Gutenberg-tm electronic works. Nearly all the individual
works in the collection are in the public domain in the United
States. If an individual work is unprotected by copyright law in the
United States and you are located in the United States, we do not
claim a right to prevent you from copying, distributing, performing,
displaying or creating derivative works based on the work as long as
all references to Project Gutenberg are removed. Of course, we hope
that you will support the Project Gutenbe﻿k. Copyright laws in most countries are
in a constant state of change. If you are outside the United States,
check the laws of your country in addition to the terms of this
agreement before downloading, copying, displaying, performing,
distributing or creating derivative works based on this work or any
other Project Gutenberg-tm work. The Foundation makes no
representations concerning the copyright status of any work in any
country outside the United States.

1.E. Unless you have removed all references to ﻿t and with almost no
  restrictions whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it
  under the terms of the Project Gutenberg License included with this
  eBook or online at www.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the
  United States, you'll have to check the laws of the country where you
  are located before using this ebook.

1.E.2. If an individual Project Gutenberg-tm electronic work is
derived from texts not protected by U.S. copyright law (does not
contain a notice indicating that it is 